



NOT LONG AGO IN A LARGE UNIVERSITY
TOWN IN California, on a street called
Orchard Avenue, a strange old man ran a
dusty shabby store. Above the dirty
show windows a faded peeling sign
said:
A-Z
ANTIQUES
CURIOS
USED MERCHANDISE
 Nobody knew for sure what the A-Z
meant. Perhaps it referred to the fact that
all sorts of strange things—everything
from A to Z—were sold in the store. Or
perhaps it had something to do with the
owner's name. However, no one seemed
to know for sure what his name actually
was. It was all part of a mysterious
uncertainty about even the smallest item
of public information about the old man.
Nobody seemed certain, for instance,
just why he was known as the Professor.
The neighborhood surrounding the
Professor's store was made up of
inexpensive apartment houses, little
family-owned shops, and small, aging
homes. The people of the area, many of
whom had some connection with the
 university, could trace their ancestors to
every continent, and just about every
country in the world.
There were dozens of children in the
neighborhood; boys and girls of every
size and style and color, some of whom
could speak more than one language
when they wanted to. But in their
schools and on the streets they all
seemed to speak the same language and
to have a number of things in common.
And one of the things they had in
common, at that time, was a vague and
mysterious fear of the old man called the
Professor.
Just what was so dangerous about the
Professor was uncertain, like everything
else about him, but his appearance
undoubtedly had something to do with
the rumors. He was tall and bent and his
thin beard straggled up his cheeks like
dry moss on gray rocks. His eyes were
dark and expressionless, and set so deep
under heavy brows that from a distance
they looked like dark empty holes. And
from a distance was the only way that
most of the children of Orchard Avenue
cared to see them. The Professor lived
somewhere at the back of his dingy
store, and when he came out to stand in
the sun in his doorway, smaller children
would cross the street if they had to
walk by.
Now and then, older and braver boys,
inspired by the old man's strangeness,
would dare each other into an attempt to
tease or torment him—but not for long.
Their absolute failure to get any sort of a
reaction from their victim was not only
discouraging, it was weird enough to
spoil the fun for even the bravest of
bullies.
Since there were several antique
stores in the area to draw the buyers, the
Professor seemed to do a fairly good
business with out-of-town collectors; but
his local trade was very small. It was
said that he sold items that were used,
but not antique, very cheaply, but even
for grown-ups the prospect of a bargain
was often not enough to offset the
discomfort of the old man's stony stare.
It was one day early in a recent
September that the Professor happened
to be the only witness to the very
beginning of the Egypt Game. He had
been looking for something in a seldom
used storeroom at the back of his shop,
when a slight noise drew him to a
window. He lifted a gunnysack curtain,
rubbed a peephole in the thick coating of
dirt, and peered through. Outside that
particular window was a small storage
yard surrounded by a high board fence. It
had been years since the Professor had
made any use of the area, and the weedgrown
yard and open lean-to shed were
empty except for a few pieces of
forgotten junk. But as the old man peered
through his dirty window, two girls were
pulling a much smaller boy through a
hole in the fence.
The Professor had seen both of the
girls before. They were about the same
age and size, perhaps eleven or twelve
years old. The one who was tugging at
the little boy's leg was thin and palely
blond, and her hair was arranged in a
straggly pile on the top of her head. Her
high cheekbones and short nose were
faintly spattered with freckles and there
was a strange droopy look to her eyes.
The old man recalled that she had been
in his store not long before, and along
with some other improbable information
she had disclosed that her name was
April.
The other girl, who had the little boy
by the shoulders, was African American,
as was the little boy himself. A
similarity in their pert features and
slender arching eyebrows indicated that
they were probably brother and sister.
The Professor had seen them pass his
store many times and knew that they
were residents of the neighborhood.
The fence that surrounded the storage
yard was high and strong and topped by
strands of barbed wire, but one thin
plank had come loose so that it was
possible to swing it to one side. Both the
girls were very slender and they had
apparently squeezed through without
much trouble, but the boy was causing a
problem. He was only about four years
old but he was sturdily built; moreover,
he was clutching a large stuffed toy to
his chest with both arms. He paid not the
slightest attention to the demands of the
two girls that he, "Turn loose of that
thing for just a minute, can't you?" and,
"Let me hold Security for you just till
you get through, Marshall." Marshall
remained very calm and patient, but his
grip on his toy didn't relax for a second.
When the little boy and his huge plush
octopus at last popped free into the yard,
the girls turned to inspect their
discovery. Their eyes flew over the
broken birdbath, the crumbling statue of
Diana the Huntress, and the stack of
fancy wooden porch pillars, and came to
rest on something in the lean-to shack. It
was a cracked and chipped plaster
reproduction of the famous bust of
Nefertiti. The two girls stared at it for a
long breathless moment and then they
turned and looked at each other. They
didn't say a word, but with widening
eyes and small taut smiles they sent a
charge of excitement dancing between
them like a crackle of electricity.
The customer, an antique dealer from
San Francisco, was stirring restlessly in
the main room of the store. Hearing him,
the Professor was reminded of his
errand. He replaced the sacking curtain
and left the storeroom. It was more than
an hour later that he remembered the
children and returned to the peephole in
the dirty window.
There had been some changes made
in the storage yard. Some of the ornate
old porch pillars had been propped up
around the lean-to so that they seemed to
be supporting its sagging tin roof; the
statue of Diana had been moved into
position near this improvised temple;
and in the place of honor at the back and
center of the shed, the bust of Nefertiti
was enthroned in the broken birdbath.
The little boy was playing quietly with
his octopus on the floor of the shed and
the two girls were busily pulling the tall
dry weeds that choked the yard, and
stacking them in a pile near the fence.
"Look, Melanie," the girl named
April said. She displayed a prickly
bouquet of thistle blossoms.
"Neat!" Melanie nodded
enthusiastically. "Lotus blossoms?"
April considered her uninviting
bouquet with new appreciation. "Yeah,"
she agreed. "Lotus blossoms."
Melanie had another inspiration. She
stood up, dumping her lap full of weeds,
and reached for the blossoms—gingerly
because of the prickles. Holding them at
arm's length, she announced
dramatically, "The Sacred Flower of
Egypt." Then she paced with dignity to
the birdbath and with a curtsy presented
them to Nefertiti.
April had followed, watching
approvingly, but now she suddenly
objected. "No! Like this," she said.
Taking the thistle flowers, she
dropped to her knees and bent low
before the birdbath. Then she crawled
backward out of the lean-to. "Neat,"
Melanie said, and, taking the flowers
back, she repeated the ritual, adding
another refinement by tapping her
forehead to the floor three times. April
gave her stamp of approval to this latest
innovation by trying it out herself, doing
the forehead taps very slowly and
dramatically. Then the two girls went
back to their weed pulling, leaving the
thistles before the altar of Nefertiti.
A few moments later the blond girl
sat back suddenly on her heels and
clapped a hand to her right eye. When
she took it away the Professor, peering
through his spy hole, noticed that the eye
had lost its strange droopy appearance.
"Melanie," April said. "They're gone.
I've lost my eyelashes."
At about that point, a customer,
entering the Professor's store, forced
him to leave his vantage point at the
dirty window. So he missed the frantic
search that followed. He also missed the
indignant scolding when the girls
discovered that April's false eye lashes
had fallen before the altar of Nefertiti,
where Marshall had found them and
quietly beautified one of the button eyes
of his octopus.
When the Professor finally was free
to return to his peephole the children had
gone home, leaving the storage yard
almost free from weeds, and a thistle
blossom offering before the birdbath.
Enter April
HER NAME WAS APRIL HALL, BUT SHE
OFTEN CALLED herself April Dawn.
Exactly one month before the Egypt
Game began in the Professor's backyard
she had come, very reluctantly, to live in
the shabby splendor of an old
California-Spanish apartment house
called the Casa Rosada. She came
because she had been sent away by
Dorothea, her beautiful and glamorous
mother, to live with a grandmother she
hardly knew, and who wore her gray
hair in a bun on the back of her head.
None of April and Dorothea's
Hollywood friends ever had gray hair,
except the kind you have on purpose, no
matter how old they got otherwise.
It had been on that very first day,
early in August, that April and the
Professor first met. On that first morning
of her new life April had spent half an
hour arranging her limp blond hair in a
high upsweep, such as Dorothea
sometimes wore. It was hard work,
much harder than it looked when
Dorothea did it. As she pinned and
repinned, April told herself with
righteous bitterness that Caroline was
sure to make her take it all down again
anyway, and all her hard work would be
for nothing.
But if her grandmother noticed the
hairdo, she said nothing about it at the
breakfast table. She didn't even seem to
notice how quiet and depressed April
was and try to cheer her up with
questions and conversation. April
decided that Caroline must be the
uninterested kind of person who didn't
notice much of anything. Well, that was
good. Because, for the short while she
was here, April intended to go right on
leading the kind of life she was used to,
and if Caroline didn't even notice—
well, at least there wouldn't be any
trouble. All through breakfast Caroline
went on saying almost nothing, but
finally when she was almost through she
did say that she wouldn't mind being
called Grandma or even Grannie, if
April liked.
"Oh, I guess I'll just go on calling you
Caroline," April said. And then with
pointed sweetness she added, "That is,
unless you'd rather I didn't." Dorothea
always called her Caroline instead of
Mother, so what was wrong with
Caroline instead of Grandmother? Of
course, Caroline wasn't Dorothea's
mother. She was the mother of April's
father, who had died in an accident
before April even had a chance to get to
know him.
Nothing more was said until Caroline
began to clear the table. Then she said,
"I've arranged for you to have lunch
with Mrs. Ross and her children on the
second floor. She said she'd send
Melanie, her little girl, up for you about
twelve o'clock. The rest of the time
you'll be more or less on your own, but
I'd appreciate it if you'd let Mrs. Ross
know if you leave the building. Just tell
her where you're going and how soon
you'll be back."
"I could get my own lunch," April
said. "I cooked a lot at home."
"I know," Caroline said, "but I've
made this arrangement with Mrs. Ross,
so we'll try it for a while, just till school
starts. The Rosses are very nice people.
Mrs. Ross teaches school and her
husband is a graduate student at the
university. Their little girl is about your
age, and they have a boy about four.
They're African Americans," she added.
April shrugged. "Dorothea and I
know a lot of black people. There are a
lot of black people in show business."
Caroline smiled. "I see," she said.
"Tell me, April, what do you think of the
Casa Rosada?"
"The what?" April said.
"The Casa Rosada, this apartment
house."
"Oh." April repeated her shrug. "It's
okay." Actually it had been a pleasant
surprise—that is, it would have been if
she'd been in the mood for pleasant
surprises. The last time she'd visited
Caroline, she'd lived in a tiny
supermodern apartment, like a cell, only
with paintings. The Casa Rosada was
very different. Somehow it made April
think of Hollywood and home. It was
very Spanishy-looking with great thick
walls, arched doorways, fancy iron
grillwork, stained-glass panels in the
windows and tile floors in the lobby.
Outside it was painted pink.
Caroline smiled her small prim
smile. "Mr. Ross calls it the Petrified
Birthday Cake, and I'm afraid that's a
pretty good description. It must have
been quite the thing when it was built
back in the twenties. Of course, it's
terribly run down now, but the
apartments are roomy. It's so hard to find
a modern place with two bedrooms
that's not awfully expensive."
It hadn't occurred to April that
Caroline had moved because of her—so
she could have a bedroom of her own.
She knew she ought to feel grateful, but
for some reason what she really felt was
angry. What made Caroline think that
April was going to be with her long
enough for it to make any difference
whether she had a room of her own or
not? Dorothea had promised it would
only be for a little while. Only until
things got more settled down and she
wasn't on tour so much of the time.
Before Caroline left she wrote down
the phone number of the library at the
university, where she worked, in case
there was an emergency and April
needed her. There wasn't much
likelihood of that. April was used to
taking care of herself.
When she was alone April went out
on the tiny iron balcony and looked
around. Caroline's apartment was on the
third and top floor and fronted on the
avenue. Most of the buildings in the
neighborhood were only one or two
stories high, so from where she stood
she could get a pretty good idea of the
lay of the land. On one side of the Casa
Rosada were some small shops—a
florist, a doughnut shop and some others.
On the other, across a narrow alley, was
a tall billboard that pretty much blocked
the view, but by leaning forward April
could see the façade of a long low
building. She could tell that it was very
dingy and the windows were badly in
need of washing. From her position—
high and to one side—she couldn't make
out the sign; but from the interesting
clutter in the show windows it seemed to
be some sort of secondhand store.
A store of that type always offered an
interesting possibility for exploring, but
April was really looking for something
else at the moment. A drugstore might do
or perhaps a beauty shop. When
Dorothea and Nick, Dorothea's agent
and good friend, had put April on the bus
the morning before, they had each
slipped her some money. It added up to
quite a bit more than April was used to
having all at once, and she wanted to
make some purchases before Caroline
found out about it. Not that she really
thought that Caroline would take the
money away, but it would be just like a
grandmother to insist that it be spent on
something "sensible" like new shoes or
a school dress.
A few minutes later April was taking
the old-fashioned elevator, with its door
like a folding iron fence, down to the
lobby. It wasn't until she was out on the
sidewalk that she remembered what
Caroline had said about reporting to
Mrs. Ross before she left the building.
She paused long enough to decide that
reporting wouldn't be possible until that
afternoon. After all, Caroline hadn't
even told her where the Rosses lived, at
least not exactly. With that settled to her
satisfaction she went on up the street.
The girl in the drugstore looked
surprised, but she didn't make too much
of a big deal out of April's purchases.
When she got out the false eyelashes, she
did ask if they were to be a present for
someone. But when April made her
smile poisonously sweet and said, "Oh
no," she seemed to get the point and
stopped asking questions. On the way
home April decided that since there was
still plenty of time before twelve
o'clock, she might as well explore the
store she had seen from the balcony.
The store was called A–Z, and its
dusty show windows were crammed
with a weird clutter of old and exoticlooking
objects—huge bronze oriental
vases next to some beat-up old pots and
pans. An old-fashioned crank telephone,
a primitive-looking wooden mask and a
treadle sewing machine. Two kerosene
lamps and a huge broad-bladed knife
with a carved ivory handle. April felt a
tiny tingle of excitement. She always felt
that way about old stuff. It had been one
of the few things that she and Dorothea
didn't agree on. Dorothea always said,
"I'll take mine new and shiny."
It was dusky inside the store after the
outdoor brightness. There didn't seem to
be any clerks at all. Not that it mattered,
because April was only looking. She
squatted down in front of a glass case
full of small objects: vases and jars,
some partly cracked or broken, crudely
made jewelry and tiny statues. All of it
looked terribly ancient and interesting.
She was pressing her nose to the glass
when suddenly she knew she was being
watched.
An old man was leaning over the
counter right above her head. "Oh
hello," April said and went on looking at
a tiny statue with broad shoulders, short
legs and a hole in the top of its head. It
looked almost Egyptian and April had
always been especially interested in
Egyptian stuff. After a moment she
looked up again and the man was still
there. "What's that?" she asked, pointing
to the tiny figure.
"That is a pre-Columbian burial
figure. It was made in Mexico about two
thousand years ago." The old man's
voice was slow and rusty.
April looked up again quickly. "Two
thousand—you're kidding," she said.
But on second glance she was sure he
wasn't. He wasn't kidding and he wasn't
quite like anyone she'd ever seen before.
He had a strange skimpy-looking little
beard and his eyes were deep set and as
blank as an empty well. He said nothing
more, and not by so much as a flicker
did his face reveal what he was thinking.
April was impressed. A deadpan was
something she'd cultivated herself, and
she knew from experience that such a
perfect one was not easily come by. "I
mean," she said with respectful caution,
"is it really that old?"
The old man only tilted his stone face
downward in a stiff nod. April went
back to studying the objects in the case,
but now her interest was divided. The
old man was almost as unusual as the
strange things behind the dusty glass. In a
few moments she stood up and smiled at
him. It was a real smile, small and
quick, not the gooey kind she usually
used on grown-ups. Somehow she had a
notion he wouldn't fool easily.
"My name is April Hall," she said.
"I've just come to live in the apartment
house next door, with my grandmother. I
used to live in Hollywood with my
mother." She paused. For a moment it
looked as if the old man wasn't going to
answer at all, but at last his craggy face
cracked enough to allow the escape of
two small words, "I see."
April regarded him with grudging
admiration. It usually wasn't very hard
to pick the real meaning out of things
people said, if you watched them
closely. But this one wasn't going to be
easy. The "I see" said nothing at all. It
wasn't friendly, or angry, or curious, or
even bored. In fact, there was something
about the absolute nothingness behind it
that was a little bit frightening, like
putting out your hand to touch something
that wasn't really there. April began to
chatter a little nervously. "I'm a nut
about things like that." She motioned
towards the case. "I'm always reading
about ancient times and stuff like that.
You know, Babylonia and Egypt and
Greece and China. It's kind of a hobby
of mine. As a matter of fact, I'm even
planning to be an archaeologist when I
grow up. Some people think that's a
pretty kooky ambition for a girl—but I
like it. You see, I have this theory about
how I was a high priestess once, in an
earlier reincarnation. Do you think that's
possible?"
"Possible?" The old man's voice
quavered the word into a whole flock of
syllables. "Many things are possible."
"That's what I think, too. A lot of
people don't think so, though. When I
told Nick—he's my mother's agent—
about the high priestess thing he just
laughed. He said, ‘I don't know about
those other reincarnations, kiddo, but in
this one you're a nut.' "
Before the old man could answer, if
he was going to, a couple of ladies
breezed in the doorway. Of course, they
interrupted right away when they saw
that April was just a kid.
As she drifted out the door and back
to the Casa Rosada, April wondered
why she'd gabbed so much. It wasn't
really like her. She'd started out just
trying to get the old man to talk and then
somehow she couldn't quit. It was
almost as if the old man's deadly silence
was a dangerous dark hole that had to be
filled up quickly with lots of words.
Enter Melanie—and
Marshall
ON THAT SAME DAY IN AUGUST, JUST A FEW
MINUTES before twelve, Melanie Ross
arrived at the door of Mrs. Hall's
apartment on the third floor. Melanie
was eleven years old and she had lived
in the Casa Rosada since she was only
seven. During that time she'd welcomed
a lot of new people to the apartment
house. Apartment dwellers, particularly
near a university, are apt to come and go.
Melanie always looked forward to
meeting new tenants, and today was
going to be especially interesting. Today,
Melanie had been sent up to get Mrs.
Hall's granddaughter to come down and
have lunch with the Rosses. Melanie
didn't know much about the new girl
except that her name was April and that
she had come from Hollywood to live
with Mrs. Hall, who was her
grandmother.
It would be neat if she turned out to
be a real friend. There hadn't been any
girls the right age in the Casa Rosada
lately. To have a handy friend again, for
spur-of-the-moment visiting, would be
great. However, she had overheard
something that didn't sound too
promising. Just the other day she'd heard
Mrs. Hall telling Mom that April was a
strange little thing because she'd been
brought up all over everywhere and
never had much of a chance to associate
with other children. You wouldn't know
what to expect of someone like that. But
then, you never knew what to expect of
any new kid, not really. So Melanie
knocked hopefully at the door of
apartment 312.
Meeting people had always been easy
for Melanie. Most people she liked right
away, and they usually seemed to feel
the same way about her. But when the
door to 312 opened that morning, for just
a moment she was almost speechless.
Surprise can do that to a person, and at
first glance April really was a surprise.
Her hair was stacked up in a pile that
seemed to be more pins than hair, and
the whole thing teetered forward over
her thin pale face. She was wearing a
big, yellowish-white fur thing around her
shoulders, and carrying a plastic purse
almost as big as a suitcase. But most of
all it was the eyelashes. They were
black and bushy looking, and the ones on
her left eye were higher up and sloped in
a different direction. Melanie's mouth
opened and closed a few times before
anything came out.
April adjusted Dorothea's old fur
stole, patted up some sliding strands of
hair and waited—warily. She didn't
expect this Melanie to like her—kids
hardly ever did—but she did intend to
make a very definite impression; and she
could see that she'd done that all right.
"Hi," Melanie managed after that first
speechless moment. "I'm Melanie Ross.
You're supposed to have lunch with us, I
think. Aren't you April Hall?"
"April Dawn," April corrected with
an offhand sort of smile. "I was
expecting you. My grandmother informed
me that—uh, she said you'd be up."
It occurred to Melanie that maybe
kids dressed differently in Hollywood.
As they started down the hall she asked,
"Are you going to stay with your
grandmother for very long?"
"Oh no," April said. "Just till my
mother finishes this tour she's on. Then
she'll send for me to come home."
"Tour?"
"Yes, you see my mother is Dorothea
Dawn—" she paused and Melanie
racked her brain. She could tell she was
supposed to know who Dorothea Dawn
was. "Well, I guess you haven't
happened to hear of her way up here, but
she's a singer and in the movies, and
stuff like that. But right now she's
singing with this band that travels around
to different places."

"Neat!" Melanie said. "You mean
your mother's in the movies?"
But just then they arrived at the
Rosses' apartment. Marshall met them at
the door, dragging Security by one of his
eight legs.
"That's my brother, Marshall,"
Melanie said.
"Hi, Marshall," April said. "Hey,
what's that following you, kid?"
Melanie grinned. "That's Security.
Marshall takes him everywhere. So my
dad named him Security. You know. Like
some little kids have a blanket."
"Security's an octopus," Marshall
said very clearly. He didn't talk very
much, but when he did he always said
exactly what he wanted to without any
trouble. He never had fooled around
with baby talk.
Melanie's mother was in the kitchen
putting hot dog sandwiches and fruit
salad on the table. When Melanie
introduced April she could tell that her
mother was surprised by the eyelashes
and hairdo and everything. She probably
didn't realize that kids dressed a little
differently in Hollywood.
"April's mother is a movie star,"
Melanie explained.
Melanie's mother smiled. "Is that
right, April?" she asked.
April looked at Melanie's mother
carefully through narrowed eyes. Mrs.
Ross looked sharp and neat, with a
smart-looking very short hairdo like a
soft black cap, and high winging
eyebrows, like Melanie's. But her smile
was a little different. April was good at
figuring out what adults meant by the
things they didn't quite say—and Mrs.
Ross's smile meant that she wasn't going
to be easy to snow.
"Well," April admitted, "not a star,
really. She's mostly a vocalist. So far
she's only been an extra in the movies.
But she almost had a supporting role
once, and Nick, that's her agent, says he
has a big part almost all lined up."
"Wow, that's cool!" Melanie said.
"We've never known anyone before
whose mother was an extra in the
movies, have we, Mom?"
"Not a soul," Mrs. Ross said, still
smiling.
During lunch, April talked a lot about
Hollywood, and the movie stars she'd
met and the big parties her mother gave
and things like that. She knew she was
overdoing it a bit but something made
her keep on. Mrs. Ross went right on
smiling in that knowing way, and
Melanie went right on being so eager
and encouraging that April thought she
must be kidding. She wasn't sure,
though. You never could tell with kids—
they didn't do things in a pattern, the
way grown-ups did.
Actually Melanie knew that April
was showboating, but it occurred to her
that it was probably because of
homesickness. It was easy to see how
much she'd like to be back in
Hollywood with her mother.
While they were having dessert of ice
cream and cookies, Mrs. Ross suggested
that April might like to look over
Melanie's books to see if there was
anything she'd like to borrow.
"Do you like to read?" Melanie
asked. "Reading is my favorite
occupation."
"That's for sure." Mrs. Ross laughed.
"A full-time occupation with overtime.
Your grandmother tells me that you do a
lot of reading, too."
"Well, of course, I'm usually pretty
busy, with all the parties and everything.
I do read some, though, when I have a
chance."
But after lunch when Melanie showed
April her library, a whole bookcase full
in her bedroom, she could tell that April
liked books more than just a little. She
could tell just by the way April picked a
book up and handled it, and by the way
she forgot about acting so grown-up and
Hollywoodish. She plopped herself
down on the floor in front of the
bookcase and started looking at books
like crazy. For a while she seemed to
forget all about Melanie. As she read
she kept propping up her eyelashes with
one finger.
All of a sudden she said, "Could you
help me get these stupid things off? I
must not have put them on the right place
or something. When I look down to read
I can't even see the words."
So Melanie scratched the ends of the
eyelashes loose with her longest
fingernail, and then April pulled them
the rest of the way off. They were on
pretty tight, and she said, "Ouch!"
several times and a couple of other
words that Melanie wasn't allowed to
say.
"————!" said April, looking in
the mirror. "I think I pulled out most of
my real ones. Does it look like it to
you?"
"I don't think so," Melanie said. "I
still see some. Is this the first time
you've worn them? The false ones, I
mean?"
April put back on her haughty face.
"Of course not. Nearly everybody wears
them in Hollywood. My mother wears
them all the time. It's just that these are
new ones, and they must be a different
kind."
April put her eyelashes away
carefully in her big bag and they went
back to looking at books. Melanie
showed her some of her favorites, and
April picked out a couple to borrow. It
was then that April took a very special
book off the shelf.
It was a very dull-looking old
geography book that no one would be
interested in. That was why Melanie
used it to hide something very special
and secret. As April opened the book
some cutout paper people fell out on the
floor.
"What are those?" April asked.
"Just some old things of mine,"
Melanie said, holding out her hand for
the book, but April kept on turning the
pages and finding more bunches of paper
people.
"Do you really still play with paper
dolls?" April asked in just the tone of
voice that Melanie had feared she would
use. Not just because she was April,
either. It was the tone of voice that
nearly anyone would use about a sixthgrade
girl who still played with ordinary
paper dolls.
"But they're not really paper dolls,"
Melanie said, "and I don't really play
with them. Not like moving them around
and dressing them up and everything.
They're just sort of a record for a game I
play. I make up a family and then I find
people who look like them in magazines
and catalogues. Just so I'll remember
them better. I have fourteen families
now. See, they all have their names and
ages written on the back. I make up stuff
about their personalities and what they
do. Sometimes I write it down like a
story, but usually I just make it up."
April's scornful look was dissolving.
"Like what?"
"Well," Melanie said, "this is the
Brewster family. Mr. Brewster is a
detective. I had to cut him out of the
newspaper because he was the only man
I could find who looked like a detective.
Don't you think he does?"
"Yeah, pretty much."
"Well anyway, he just—that is, I just
made up about how he solved this very
hard mystery and caught some dangerous
criminals. And then the criminals
escaped and were going to get revenge
on Mr. Brewster. So the whole family
had to go into hiding and wear disguises
and everything."
April spread the Brewsters out on the
floor. Her eyes were shining and without
the eyelashes they were pretty, wide and
blue. "Have they caught the criminals
yet?" she asked. Melanie shook her
head. "Well, how about if the kids catch
them. They could just happen to find out
where the criminals were hiding?"
"Neat!" Melanie said. "Maybe
Ted"—she pointed to the smallest paper
Brewster—"could come home and tell
the other kids how he thinks he saw one
of the criminals, going into a certain
house."
"And then," April interrupted, "the
girls could go to the house pretending to
sell Girl Scout cookies, to see if it really
was the crooks."
From the Girl-Scout-cookies caper,
the game moved into even more exciting
escapades, and when Mrs. Ross came in
to say that Marshall was down for his
nap and that she was leaving for the
university, where she was taking a
summer course for schoolteachers, the
criminals were just escaping, taking one
of the Brewster children with them as a
hostage. An hour later, when Marshall
came in sleepy-eyed and dragging
Security, several of the other paper
families had been brought into the plot.
Marshall seemed content to sit and
listen, so the game went on with daring
adventures, narrow escapes, tragic
illnesses and even a romance or two. At
last, right in the middle of a shipwreck
on a desert island, April noticed the time
and said she'd have to go home so she'd
be there when Caroline got back from
work.
As they walked to the door Melanie
asked, "Do you want to play some more
tomorrow?"
April was adjusting her fur stole
around her shoulders for the trip
upstairs. "Oh, I guess so," she said with
a sudden return to haughtiness.
But Melanie was beginning to
understand about April's frozen spells,
and how to thaw her out. You just had to
let her know she couldn't make you stop
liking her that easily. "None of my
friends know how to play imagining
games the way you do," Melanie said.
"Some of them can do it a little bit but
they mostly don't have any very good
ideas. And a lot of them only like ball
games or other things that are already
made up. But I like imagining games
better than anything."
April was being very busy trying to
get her stole to stay on because the clasp
was a little bit broken. All at once she
pulled it off, wadded it all up and tucked
it under her arm. She looked right
straight at Melanie and said, "You know
what? I never did call them that before,
but imagining games are just about all I
ever play because most of the time I
never have anybody to play with."
She started off up the hall. Then she
turned around and walked backward,
waving her fur stole around her head
like a lasso. "You've got lots of good
ideas, too," she yelled.
The Egypt Girls
ALL THROUGH THE MONTH OF AUGUST,
MELANIE AND April were together
almost every day. They played the
paper-families game and other games,
both in the Rosses' apartment and in
Caroline's. They took Marshall for
walks and to the park while Mrs. Ross
was gone to her class, and almost every
day they went to the library. It was in the
library in August that the seeds were
planted that grew into the Egypt Game in
September in the Professor's deserted
yard.
It all started when April found a new
book about Egypt, an especially
interesting one about the life of a young
pharaoh. She passed it on to Melanie,
and with it a lot of her interest in all
sorts of ancient stuff. Melanie was soon
as fascinated by the valley of the Nile as
April had been. Before long, with the
help of a sympathetic librarian, they had
found and read just about everything the
library had to offer on Egypt—both fact
and fiction.
They read about Egypt in the library
during the day, and at home in the
evening, and in bed late at night when
they were supposed to be asleep. Then
in the mornings while they helped each
other with their chores they discussed
the things they had found out. In a very
short time they had accumulated all sorts
of fascinating facts about tombs and
temples, pharaohs and pyramids,
mummies and monoliths, and dozens of
other exotic topics. They decided that
the Egyptians couldn't have been more
interesting if they had done it on
purpose. Everything, from their love of
beauty and mystery, to their fascinating
habit of getting married when they were
only eleven years old, made good stuff
to talk about. By the end of the month,
April and Melanie were beginning work
on their own alphabet of hieroglyphics
for writing secret messages, and at the
library they were beginning to be called
the Egypt Girls.
But in between all the good times,
both April and Melanie were spending
some bad moments worrying about the
beginning of school. April was worried
because she knew from experience—lots
of it—that it isn't easy to face a new
class in a new school. She didn't admit
it, not even to Melanie, but she was
having nightmares about the first day of
school. There were classroom
nightmares, and schoolyard nightmares
and principal's office nightmares; but
there was another kind, too, that had to
do with an empty mailbox. In the whole
month of August she had had only one
very short postcard from Dorothea.
Melanie was worried, too, but in a
different way. School had always been
easy for Melanie; and even though she
wasn't the kind who got elected class
president, she'd always had plenty of
friends. But now there was April to think
about.
April was the most exciting friend
Melanie had ever had. No one else knew
about so many fascinating things, or
could think up such marvelous things to
do. With April, a walk to the library
could become an exploration of a
forbidden land, or a shiny pebble on the
sidewalk could be a magic token from an
invisible power. When April got that
imagining gleam in her eye there was no
telling what was going to happen next.
Just about any interesting subject you
could mention, April was sure to know a
lot of weird and wonderful facts about
it. And if she didn't, you could always
count on her to make up a few, just to
keep things going.
There was only one thing that April
didn't seem to know much about—that
was getting along with people. Most
people, anyhow. With Melanie, April
was herself, new and different from
anyone, wild and daring and terribly
brave. But with other people she was
often quite different. With other kids she
usually put on her Hollywood act,
terribly grown-up and bored with
everything. And with most grown-ups
April's eyes got narrow and you
couldn't believe a word she said.
Melanie had gone to Wilson School
all her life, and she knew what it was
like. There were all different kinds of
kids at Wilson; kids who looked and
talked and acted all sorts of ways.
Wilson was used to that. But there were
some things that Wilson kids just
wouldn't stand for, and Melanie was
afraid that April's Hollywood act was
one of them.
And Melanie wasn't entirely just
guessing about how her schoolmates
would react to April. A couple of times
when April and Melanie had been at the
library or in the park they'd run into
some of the Wilson kids Melanie knew;
and you could see right away that April
wasn't making the right kind of
impression. And it was going to be
worse at school, where every kid would
feel duty bound to do his or her part in
trimming the new kid down to size.
Melanie had a feeling that April wasn't
going to trim easily.
The thing that worried Melanie the
most was the eyelashes. April was still
wearing them a lot of the time. She'd
gotten so she didn't wear them to the
library because she still had trouble
reading through them, but even if she
hadn't had them on all day she always
put them on when it was time for her
grandmother to come home. Once
Melanie asked her why.
"She doesn't like for me to wear
them," April said.
Melanie thought about that for a
minute. Then she said, "You don't like
your grandmother very much, do you?"
April just shrugged but her eyes got
narrow.
"I don't see why," Melanie said. "She
seems pretty nice to me."
"She doesn't like my mother," April
said. "She doesn't even think that
Dorothea's going to send for me to come
home pretty soon."
"Did she say so?"
"No, but she thinks it. I can tell."
Then, just at the beginning of
September, with school only a few days
away, came that exciting day when the
Egypt Game began. April and Melanie
and Marshall were on their way home
through the alley when, by the sheerest
luck, Melanie noticed the loose plank. It
had moved stiffly, that first time, with a
reluctant rusty yelp and they peeked
through into the hidden and deserted
yard. It was fascinating—so weedgrown
and forgotten and secret—but
then came the most unbelievably
wonderful part of all.
There she was, waiting for them in
the shed, Nefertiti, the beautiful queen of
ancient Egypt, like a magical omen, or,
as April put it, "a beautiful messenger
from out of the ancient past." There had
to be something terribly out-of-theordinary
about it. Why, it had only been
a few days before that they had read all
about her and admired a picture of her
lovely sculptured head. And there it
was, almost like magic. Very much like
magic, in fact—and that's the way the
Egypt Game was, from the very
beginning.
But even the discovery of Egypt
didn't stop the beginning of school from
arriving with all its problems. So, when
April lost one of her eyelashes that first
day in Egypt, Melanie couldn't help
feeling a little relieved, although she
wouldn't have said so. But then, there it
was on Security—and the problem was
just as complicated as ever. It was the
next morning when Melanie finally got
up nerve enough to talk to April about it.
April was helping Melanie dry the
dishes so they'd be ready to leave for
Egypt sooner. "Are you going to wear
your eyelashes to school?" Melanie
asked with careful casualness.
But April turned quickly, and with her
face all shut up the way it was with other
people. "Sure," she said. "Why not?"
"Oh, I don't know. I just don't think
anybody else at Wilson wears them."
April's chin went up and her lips
thinned. "Am I supposed to care what
the kids at a little old place like Wilson
School wear?"
Melanie could see that she wasn't
going to get anywhere so she let the
subject drop. But before the dishes were
finished she had started making a drastic
plan. April just couldn't wear those
eyelashes to school on the first day. She
was going to be hard enough to integrate
even without them.
As soon as Melanie had finished her
chores they were free to head for Egypt.
Since it was Saturday, Melanie's parents
were both at home, but Mr. Ross always
had to study and he was only too glad for
the girls to get Marshall out from
underfoot. Just outside the apartment
door April stopped with her finger to her
lips.
"Shhh," she warned, "we must
proceed with caution. We may be being
watched."
"Who's watching?" Marshall asked,
looking around.
"The enemies of Egypt. Who were
those worst enemies, Melanie?"
"The Syrians," Melanie whispered.
"Yeah, they're the ones. The Syrians.
Their spies are everywhere."
With elaborate caution they made
their way out of the back door of the
Casa Rosada and down the alley. They
went the wrong way first and took
evasive action through a garage and
around a stack of garbage pails. Then
they crawled through a piece of cement
pipe and started to make a run for it; but
they had to go back for Marshall, who
was still in the pipe, all tangled up in
Security's legs. When they finally
arrived at the fence they were out of
breath.
"All clear?" Melanie asked, looking
both ways.
"Yes, for the time being," April
breathed. "But they almost had us. That
was a close call back there in the
tunnel."
"Close," Melanie agreed, "but we
fooled them." With that they shoved
Marshall through the hole in the fence
and crawled in after him.
The Evil God and the
Secret Spy
WHEN APRIL AND MARSHALL AND
MELANIE SQUEEZED back through the
fence for the second time they found
everything just as they had left it. They
started out by pulling the rest of the dead
weeds and stacking them in one corner
of the yard. While Marshall stood guard
halfway down the alley to see if anyone
was coming, they shoved the whole
stack out through the hole in the fence.
Then they scouted around and found a
trash bin that was nice and roomy and
not too full to hold an extra donation of
dead weeds. When, at last, the loose
stones and broken bits of things had been
cleared away, Egypt looked clean and
bare and ready for whatever might be
going to happen.
Next they turned their attention to the
lean-to shed, or the Temple, as they were
already beginning to call it. It was
actually only a wooden platform about a
foot off the ground, across one end of the
yard. A roof of corrugated tin was
supported in the front by a few wooden
posts, and on the other three sides walls
were formed by the tall boards of the
fence. Already the birdbath altar of
Nefertiti, the fancy pillars from the
porch of some Victorian mansion and the
crumbling statue of Diana by the
entrance were beginning to create a
temple-like atmosphere. But there was
much more that could be done.
April and Melanie were sitting on the
edge of the Temple's floor resting for a
moment, and planning, when April
pointed out the only real door to the
storage yard. It was on the opposite site
from the loose plank and was apparently
locked with a latch and padlock from the
outside. "I wonder where it goes to," she
said.
Melanie thought a moment. "I guess it
goes to the rest of the Professor's
backyard," she said. "You know, that
part with a driveway so trucks and
things can back up to his store for
deliveries. You can see into that part
from the alley." It was right then when
she mentioned the Professor that
Melanie, for the first time, had an
uncomfortable feeling. "What do you
suppose the Professor would do if he
caught us in here?" she wondered out
loud.
April shrugged. Melanie had told her
how most of the children in the
neighborhood felt about the Professor.
While she had to admit he'd been a little
bit creepy, she didn't see what all the
fuss was about. But Melanie seemed to
feel that April's short talk with the old
man had made her an authority on the
subject, so she was more or less obliged
to come up with an opinion. "I don't
think he'd do a thing," she said. "I just
don't think he'd even care, as long as we
don't bother him or hurt anything.
Besides, how's he going to know? You
can tell by the weeds and everything that
no one's been in here for ages. I'll bet
the padlock on that door's rusted so tight
he couldn't get in if he wanted to. And
that window isn't the kind that opens.
He'd have to break the glass if he
wanted to get through."
"He might be watching us through it,
though."
Somehow that thought was almost
more scary than the possibility of the
Professor's actually entering the yard.
With one accord the girls moved warily
towards the window. Closer and closer
until their noses were only inches from
the dirty panes. Then Melanie breathed a
sigh of relief. "There's something like a
heavy curtain hanging clear across it. He
couldn't see through that."
"Besides, I don't think he could see
through the dirt even if there wasn't a
curtain. I'll bet this window's in some
little back room he doesn't even use any
more. Otherwise he wouldn't leave it so
dirty."
Feeling pleasantly safe and secure,
the girls sat back down and began to
make plans. Marshall was busy digging
a little hole in the middle of the yard
with a sharp stick. He had knotted two of
Security's legs together around his neck
so that his hands would be free for
digging. Security's pear-shaped plush
body and six of his black legs were
hanging down Marshall's back.
"I know," April said suddenly,
"Marshall can be the young pharaoh,
heir to the throne of Egypt. Only there's
a civil war going on, and the other side
is trying to kill him."
"Okay. And we can be high
priestesses of Isis who are assigned to
protect him."
"Ummm," April said. "Or else we
could be evil high priestesses who are
going to offer him as a human sacrifice
on the crocodile altar to—what was that
evil god's name?"
"Set?"
"Yeah, that's the one." April jumped
to her feet. Throwing up her arms, she
chanted, "Almighty Set has promised his
servants, the crocodile gods of the Nile,
the bloody heart of the young Pharaoh,
Marsh—uh, Marshamosis!" She dropped
to her knees. "O mighty Set, god of evil,
we hear and obey."
Marshall had stopped digging, and
now he stood up and started towards the
opening in the fence. The girls ran after
him. He didn't struggle when they caught
him, but Melanie was familiar with the
expression on his face. His funny little
baby-round chin was sticking out
defiantly and his black eyes glared.
"Leave my bloody heart alone," he said.
The girls giggled. "You know, he's
pretty sharp for a four-year-old," April
said.
Melanie got down on her knees and
tried to take Marshall's hands, but he
wouldn't turn loose of Security.
"Marshall, honey," she said, "it's just a
game. Just pretend. We wouldn't really
hurt you."
"What's a pharaoh?" Marshall asked
suspiciously.
"A king," Melanie said, "king of all
the Egyptians." Marshall's frown lifted a
little and his chin began to go back into
its normal position.
"A terribly important kind of king,"
April said. "Everybody had to bow
down to him and do exactly what he
said."
Marshall nodded soberly. "I'll play,"
he said.
So that was the way Set started—Set
the god of evil and black magic. At first
he was just supposed to be a character in
that particular game, and that first day he
was represented by a picture of a man
with an animal's head that Melanie drew
on a piece of cardboard and tacked to
the wall. But once he got started, he
seemed to grow and develop almost on
his own, and all out of control; until he
was more than evil, and at times a lot
more than Egyptian. For instance, at
different times, his wicked tricks
included everything from atomic ray
guns to sulfur and brimstone.
But, actually, that was the way with
all of the Egypt Game. Nobody ever
planned it ahead, at least, not very far.
Ideas began and grew and afterwards it
was hard to remember just how. That
was one of the mysterious and
fascinating things about it.
On that particular day, the game about
Marshamosis, the boy pharaoh, and Set,
the god of evil, didn't get very far.
They'd no more than gotten started when
April and Melanie decided they just had
to have some more equipment before
they could play it well. So they
postponed the game and went instead to
scout around in the alley for boards and
boxes to use in making things like
thrones and altars. They found just what
they needed behind the doughnut shop
and the furniture store in the next block,
and brought them back to Egypt. And it
was on the same trip that they had the
good luck to rescue an old metal mixing
bowl from a garbage pail. April said it
would be just the thing for a firepit for
building sacred fires.
When they had everything as far as
the hole in the fence, they ran into a
problem. The bowl and boards went
through all right, but the boxes were just
too big. The only solution was to throw
them over the top of the fence. It wasn't
easy, and in landing they made quite a bit
of noise.
It wasn't long afterwards that the
curtain on the small window at the back
of the Professor's store was pushed very
carefully to one side. But April and
Melanie were so busy building and
planning that they didn't notice at all.
Only someone with very sharp eyes
would have been able to see the figure
that stood silently behind the very dirty
window in the darkened room.
Eyelashes and
Ceremony
THE NEXT DAY WAS THE LAST BEFORE
SCHOOL WAS TO start. It was also
Melanie's last chance to put into effect
her plan to get rid of the eyelashes. So
after dinner she went up to Mrs. Hall's
apartment to see April. She took the
library book that she was reading and
one that she knew April wanted to read.
In April's room they talked about the
Egypt Game and about school starting in
the morning—what they were going to
wear and things like that. Then Melanie
suggested they read for a while, so they
got comfortable on their stomachs across
April's bed and started in on the books
—and sure enough, April got up and
took off her eyelashes so she could see
better.
But, for once, both the girls had a
hard time keeping their minds on their
reading. April was thinking about the
next day, telling herself that it didn't
matter whether the people at Wilson
School were friendly or not, because
Dorothea would write soon saying she
wanted April to come home. Dorothea—
it seemed ages since April had seen her.
April shut her eyes and tried to picture
her, but tonight the picture wouldn't
come clear. It was only a blur—a blur of
laughter, talk, movement and color. But a
bright and beautiful blur, no matter how
distant, was better than a reality that was
dull and gray.
Melanie was having trouble keeping
her mind on her reading because she was
so worried about what she was planning
to do. In fact, they both were having such
a hard time pretending not to worry that
they were secretly relieved when
Caroline came in and suggested it was
bedtime for girls who were going to
school in the morning. The eyelashes
were lying on April's dresser and
Melanie managed to walk right past them
as she went out. Because of the sticky
stuff to make them stay on your eyelids,
she only had to brush her hand against
them to pick them up. Feeling triumphant
and treacherous at the same time,
Melanie took the eyelashes home and hid
them in her closet. She kept them there
until the first few days of school were
over. Then she took them back and put
them under April's dresser, so it would
look as if they'd just happened to fall.
By that time April had gotten out of the
notion of wearing them to school.
But even without the eyelashes
Melanie had a hard time trying to
translate April into something that
Wilson School could understand and
appreciate. April was still wearing her
hair in a messy upsweep and her
mother's ratty old fur stole, even though
her grandmother had given her a great
new jacket. Besides, she still put on her
Hollywood act with people she didn't
know, and worst of all, she got furiously
angry when she was teased. Melanie
could see that to the kids at Wilson, all
the stuff April knew made her a know-itall;
her wonderful differentness was
only kookiness; and her courage only
meant she'd punch you in the nose if you
kidded her, no matter how many teachers
were looking.
At least, that was the way it was for a
while. But with Melanie working her
hardest as go-between, it wasn't too
long before things began to be a little
better. The sixth grade began to find out
that April had a way of making life
interesting. For instance, when she
raised her hand in class, her answer
wasn't always what the teacher wanted,
but it was almost certain to be
fascinating. And when it came to guts—
whether it was hanging by your heels
from the highest bar, or putting a
stinkbug on the principal's desk—you
could count on April to do it first and
best.
By the third week in September,
although the sixth graders were still
teasing April—from a safe distance—
they were beginning to think of her rather
proudly, as their own private oddball.
But it was when Toby and Ken gave her
a nickname that Melanie knew for sure
that the worst was over. Toby Alvillar
and Ken Kamata were two of the biggest
wheels in class, and if you were really
hopeless they simply didn't notice you—
it was as if you didn't exist. So when
they started calling April, February,
Melanie knew everything would be all
right. It was teasing, maybe, but not the
kind you use on outsiders.
In the meantime, in the afternoons and
on weekends, the Egypt Game was
really beginning to take shape. As soon
as school was out every day, the girls
picked up Marshall at his nursery school
and hurried home. Then they were free
to spend their time in Egypt, until almost
5:30, when Caroline and the Rosses
came home.
The lean-to temple now had two
altars and two gods. The birdbath altar
had been moved to the right side, while
on the left was the altar of Set, the Evil
One. Set's altar was made from an egg
crate covered by a piece of an old
bedspread, and the god himself was a
rather pear-shaped figure of dried mud.
April and Melanie had looked and
looked for a suitable Set. For a while
they tried a Chinese kitchen-god figurine
from Schmitt's Variety Store, but he was
all wrong—much too nice and pleasant
looking. At last, they had to resort to
making a Set themselves, from some
clayey mud from the Casa Rosada's
dead flower garden. Except for his
glowing eyes, which were made of glass
buttons of a deep fiery red, he didn't turn
out particularly well. In fact, at first he
seemed rather laughable. But as time
passed and the game progressed, Set's
face hardened and cracked into a wicked
leer, and it became clear that his strange,
sunken, formless body was the very
shape of evil. Dark and deep as the mud
of the Nile, Set brooded lumpily through
a mist of sandalwood incense—ninetynine
cents at Schmitt's—over all kinds
of mystic ceremonies, weird rites and
wicked plots.
Opposite the altar of the wicked god
stood the birdbath throne of the goddess
of goodness. Of course, she was still
represented by the plaster bust of
Nefertiti, but as the game went on she
began to be called Isis most of the time,
because she was a goddess and not just a
queen. And since the pharaohs were
supposed to be related to the gods, it
really didn't matter if Isis and Nefertiti
got a little bit confused. Whatever her
name, what she stood for was always the
same—love and beauty and every kind
of perfection.
There was always a great deal to do
in the land of Egypt. Right at first April
and Melanie got terribly involved in
composing and practicing rites and
ceremonies for the two gods. The rituals
were very complicated and the correct
order of processions, chants,
prostrations, sprinklings with holy water
and sacrificial offerings had to be
carefully written down so that they
wouldn't be forgotten. At first the
records were on ordinary notebook
paper, but then Melanie, whose
handwriting was the nicest, put it all
down on onionskin paper rolled on
pieces of an old fishing pole they'd
found in the alley. Each page was glued
on two pieces of pole so it could be
rolled and unrolled like a papyrus
scroll. Someday, they decided, they
would do it all over in hieroglyphics,
when they'd found time to finish their
hieroglyphic alphabet, but for the present
it was just written in English. Then,
when Marshall discovered that the
wooden base of the Diana statue was
hollow, and one side was a little loose,
they had a perfect secret vault for the
storage of sacred records.
Of course the temple and the two
altars had to be decorated, too. It wasn't
at all difficult to find the right sort of
things for the altar of Nefertiti-Isis.
Flowers, candles, beads, pretty stones,
blown-glass figurines of birds and deer,
in fact, anything beautiful, seemed to suit
the lovely goddess. One day Melanie
brought her poster paints and they
painted stars and birds and flowers on
the fence in back of the altar; and another
day they made a canopy to hang above
Nefertiti's head. They made it from an
old fluffy half-slip of crinoline and lace,
but when they were through cutting and
pinning and tacking, it looked exactly
like a canopy and not like a petticoat at
all.
Set was more of a problem. For a
while he had only his incense burner,
which was made of an old metal ash
tray. April suggested that they might find
something suitable in the Professor's
store, but Melanie wouldn't go with her
to help her shop. Melanie had lived too
long in the neighborhood and been
almost brought up on all those scary
rumors about the Professor. And
besides, she said, what could they buy
for fifty cents, which was about all they
could scrape up at the time. So Set had
to settle for some spiders and snakes
painted on the wall behind him, and a
dry bone that hung on a string above his
head. April had gone to the trouble of
tricking an unfriendly dog out of the bone
because it was so large and sinister
looking; and it had just the right effect
hanging there over the evil god, twisting
and turning in the wind.
Then one day on the way to school
Melanie found a strange dark stone. It
was lying in the middle of a sidewalk,
where a stone had no reason to be; but
even more mysterious, when you held it
at just the right angle it looked exactly
like a pair of long pointed jaws with a
bulging snout and jagged teeth.
"There's no doubt about it," April
said, "it's no ordinary rock, that's for
sure."
So they put it on the altar, too, and
called it the Crocodile Stone, and from
then on it became the mysterious and
powerful source of much of Set's power.
At first Marshall only watched
everything that was going on, but after a
while he began to be impatient and
wanted to know, "When are you going to
play about the pharaoh some more, like
you said?" When April told him they
wouldn't be ready for that for a long
time, his chin began to stick out. So, to
keep him happy, they let him start being
a sort of junior high priest. At the next
ceremony, which was to be the
presentation of a dead lizard as a
sacrificial offering to Set, Marshall
marched at the head of the procession
and sprinkled holy water from a tuna
can. He did a good job, too, except that
he wouldn't put Security down, not even
to be a high priest.
At first April said nobody could be
the high priest of an evil god with a toy
octopus hanging around his neck, but she
finally agreed they could pretend it was
some kind of a fancy ceremonial robe.
And when the procession was over she
had to admit that Marshall had done
awfully well, for a little kid. "He even
remembered all the words to the chant
and he sprinkled in all the right places,"
she said wonderingly. But Melanie
wasn't surprised at all.
"That's the way with Marshall," she
said. "He's been awfully grown-up ever
since—oh, since about the time he
started walking. That is, about
everything except Security. I guess he's
not very grown-up about that. Dad says
the reason Marshall needs Security is
that he had such a hard time being a
baby. Dad says being a baby offended
Marshall's dignity."
April shrugged. "Yeah, I guess
everybody has something they're not
very grown-up about," she said.
Neferbeth
NEAR THE END OF SEPTEMBER A NEW GIRL
MOVED into the Casa Rosada. Her name
was Elizabeth Chung. She and her
mother and two little sisters had rented
the little semibasement apartment next to
where Mr. Bodler, the janitor, lived.
Caroline went down to call on Mrs.
Chung the evening the family moved in
to see if there was anything she could do
to help them get settled. She asked April
if she wanted to go along to meet
Elizabeth, but April said, "No thanks."
When her grandmother came back
upstairs, April found out all about the
new family. Mr. Chung had died recently
and his wife was going to have to get a
job to support her three little girls. She
had moved to the Casa Rosada because
it was only a few blocks from where her
parents lived. Mrs. Chung's mother was
going to take care of the two smallest
girls while she was at work.
"Elizabeth is only a little younger
than you and Melanie," Caroline said.
"Perhaps you could ask her to play with
you. She's probably feeling lonely and
worried about starting in at a new
school."
April was ambushed by a quick pang
of sympathy, remembering how it was—
missing someone and having to face a
new classroom. But she pulled herself
together and shook it off. It occurred to
her that Caroline ought to know that you
didn't pick your friends just because
they were handy—or even lonely. You
picked them because you thought alike
and were interested in the same things,
the way she and Melanie were. "How
old is she?" she asked, letting her eyes
go narrow.
"I think her mother said she was
nine," Caroline said.
"Nine," said April, with a cool smile,
"is a lot younger than eleven."
"Well, of course, it will have to be up
to you and Melanie to decide," Caroline
said calmly, but as she turned to leave
the room April was sure she heard a
rather exasperated sigh.
April tried to feel pleased about the
sigh, but something prickled
uncomfortably. She decided she didn't
want to think about it. She called to
Caroline that she was going down to talk
to Melanie. Melanie would understand
how impossible it would be to invite
someone else to be part of anything so
private and secret as the Egypt Game.
Mr. Ross called, "Come in," when
April knocked. He was sitting on the
couch surrounded by books and papers.
He was studying to be a college teacher
and he always had a lot of work to do in
the evenings. He was a big man with
dark brown skin and a teasing smile. He
was always kidding April about her
name. When April opened the door he
said, "Just as I thought, it's springtime.
Melanie! the cruelest month is here."
Mr. Ross was going to teach things
like poetry and literature, and he was
always making jokes that weren't very
funny unless you knew what he was
talking about. That "cruelest month"
business, for instance, was something he
was always kidding April about. It
didn't make any sense to April until
Melanie found out about it and
explained. It seemed it came from a big
long poem that started out about how
April was the "cruelest month." April
still didn't think it was any riot, but she
guessed it was okay for that kind of joke.
As soon as the girls were alone in
Melanie's room, April brought up the
subject of Elizabeth. Sure enough,
Melanie's mother had been after her, too,
to make the new girl feel at home.
"I don't know what they think we can
do," April said. "We can't let her in on
the Egypt Game. She'd be sure to fink
about it and ruin everything."
"Well, we'll have to get to know her
first," Melanie said, "and see if she's the
kind who can keep a secret. And then—"
"Keep a secret!" April interrupted
scornfully. "For one thing, she's only
nine years old."
"Well, Marshall's only four,"
Melanie said, "and he doesn't ever
fink."
"Marshall's different," April said
impatiently. "This Elizabeth is probably
just like any other blabbermouth fourth
grader."
Alarmed at what seemed to her to be
a rather wishy-washy attitude on
Melanie's part, April didn't go home
until she felt sure they had reached a
firm decision. No matter what, no new
girl was going to be let in on the Egypt
Game. If they asked Elizabeth to walk to
school with them, and maybe talked to
her at recesses for a while, until she got
around to making fourth-grade friends,
that would be enough.
The next morning April and Melanie
went dutifully down the little dark
basement hallway and knocked on the
door of the Chungs' apartment. Almost
immediately the door across the hall
opened and Mr. Bodler, the janitor,
looked out. "Oh, hello there, young
ladies," he said. "Thought I heard
someone knocking on my door."
"Hello, Mr. Bodler," Melanie said.
"We've come to get the new girl and
take her to school with us."
"Well now, isn't that nice. I think
that's right nice of you young ladies."
April and Melanie turned back to the
Chungs' door, but Mr. Bodler went on
standing behind them. They exchanged
sideways "wouldn't you know it"
glances. Mr. Bodler was a fattish man
with faded blond hair who was always
nosily cheerful at children. The situation
was already uncomfortable, and Mr.
Bodler, who was a naturally
uncomfortable person to be around,
wasn't making it any better.
The door of the Chungs' apartment
was finally opened by a very small
Asian girl. "Hi," April said. "Is your big
sister ready for school? We've come to
take her."
The girl smiled shyly. "I'm
Elizabeth," she said.
On the way to school Elizabeth
walked between April and Melanie. She
really was amazingly tiny for a fourth
grader. Her thick black hair was pulled
back into a carefully curled ponytail that
bounced when she walked. And there
was something about the carved
perfection of her face that made her
smile seem like magic—an enchanted
ivory princess warming suddenly to life.
She was shy, but not in the stiff
embarrassing way that makes other
people feel embarrassed, too. It was a
gentle friendly shyness that made other
people feel important, sort of in charge
of things.
April had been afraid—well, looking
at Elizabeth's upturned face and pretty
tilted eyes, wide with wonder at almost
anything you told her, it was hard to
remember just what she had been afraid
of. She almost wished she hadn't been
so convincing when she talked to
Melanie the night before about how they
didn't want anybody else butting into
their friendship.
By the time April and Melanie
delivered Elizabeth to the door of the
fourth-grade room, they had completely
forgotten that taking care of Elizabeth
had been anybody's idea but their own.
Melanie's forehead wrinkled with worry
as she watched Elizabeth make her way
timidly through the noisily assembling
fourth graders, to the teacher's desk.
And a couple of boys who were saying,
"Hey, look at the new girl!" and, "Ugh!
A girl!" and other typically fourth-grade
remarks were suddenly silenced when
they met April's ferocious glare.
That afternoon April and Melanie
walked Elizabeth home and by the next
morning they were both wondering if it
wouldn't be all right, after all, to let her
join the Egypt Game. But it was a touchy
sort of thing to bring up, not knowing for
sure how the other one felt about it. And
then a very strange thing happened.
Elizabeth had arranged to meet them
that morning on the front steps of the
Casa Rosada and when April and
Melanie were crossing the lobby they
could see her through the glass of the
front door. She was sitting on the railing
and looking off up Orchard Avenue so
her profile was towards them. All of a
sudden April grabbed Melanie's arm.
"Look!" she whispered.
"What?" Melanie whispered back.
"Elizabeth," April said. "Who does
she look like?"
Melanie caught her breath.
"Nefertiti," she breathed.
Sure enough. Elizabeth's ponytail
pulled her hair back away from her face
and neck; and there was certainly
something about her delicate, slendernecked
profile that was very like the
statue of Nefertiti. Of course, Elizabeth's
nose was a tiny bit shorter and maybe
her chin a little rounder, but the
resemblance was there just the same.
She saw them then and bounced
through the door to meet them before
anything more could be said, but it
wasn't really necessary. April and
Melanie just looked at each other and
nodded, and on the way to school they
started telling Elizabeth all about the
Egypt Game.
Prisoners of Fear
ELIZABETH TURNED OUT TO BE JUST WHAT
THE Egypt Game needed to make it
perfect. Of course, she didn't have many
ideas; but then, she was younger and
hadn't had a chance to learn much about
ancient history. Besides, April and
Melanie had almost more ideas than they
could use anyway. Elizabeth helped in
other ways.
She was just crazy about every part
of the Egypt Game, and she was full of
admiring comments. For instance, she
loved the "Hymn to Isis" that Melanie
had made up almost by herself, with just
a little bit of help from a book of
Egyptian poetry. Elizabeth said it was
the most beautiful thing she'd ever
heard. And the first time she saw April
do a ceremony for Set she kept jumping
up and down with half-scared
excitement. For a few days it was fun
just doing everything over for Elizabeth
to appreciate; and after that they got
around to starting a new part of the
game. In the new part, Marshall finally
got to be the young pharaoh,
Marshamosis, again, and Elizabeth was
the queen, Neferbeth. April and Melanie
were priestesses. First they were evil
priestesses, leading Marshamosis and
Neferbeth into the clutches of the wicked
Set. And then they were priestesses of
Isis coming to the rescue.
• • •
That was about where they were in the
Game, when something happened that
almost put an end to the Egypt Game;
and not to the Egypt Game alone, but to
all the outdoor games in the whole
neighborhood. On that particular
afternoon, the girls had built a dungeon
out of cardboard boxes in the corner of
the storage yard. Elizabeth and Marshall
were languishing in the dungeon, tied
hand and foot, victims of the priests of
Set. April and Melanie were creeping
cautiously from pillar to pillar in the
Temple of Evil, on their way to the
rescue. Melanie was crouching behind
an imaginary pillar, when suddenly she
straightened up and stood listening. In
the dungeon Elizabeth heard it too, and
quickly untied her bonds. April ran to
help Marshall with his. They were really
only kite string and knotted easily. From
somewhere not too far away, perhaps the
main alley behind the Casa Rosada, Mrs.
Ross's voice was calling, "Melanie!
Marshall! Melanie!" There was
something about the tone of her voice
that made Melanie's eyes widen with
fear.
"Something's wrong," she said.
"It's too early." April nodded. "She
never gets home this early."
They scrambled through the hole in
the fence and, dragging Marshall to hurry
him up, they dashed for the main alley
behind the Casa Rosada. From there they
could safely answer without giving the
location of Egypt away.
Mrs. Ross met them near the back
door of the apartment house. Even
though they all clamored to know what
was the matter, she only shook her head
and said, "There's been some trouble in
the neighborhood. April, you and
Elizabeth come up to our apartment until
your folks get home."
Of course they were all terribly
curious, but Mrs. Ross wouldn't say any
more. "We'll wait to discuss it until we
have the facts," she said. "What I know
right now amounts only to rumors. There
may not be any truth in the story at all."
It occurred to all of them, though, that
the rumors had been frightening enough
to make Mrs. Ross cancel her afterschool
remedial reading class—which
she almost never did—and come home
early. And Melanie noticed a
strangeness in her voice and that her
hand shook as she put milk and cookies
on the table. It had to be something
serious.
By the next day it was common
knowledge. A little girl who lived in the
neighborhood had been killed. She
hadn't gone to Wilson School, so April
and Melanie had barely known her, but
her home was only a few blocks away
from the Casa Rosada. Like all children
in the neighborhood, and in all
neighborhoods for that matter, she had
been warned about strangers—but she
must have forgotten. She had been on her
way to the drugstore—the very one
where April had purchased her
eyelashes—in the early evening, and she
had never returned. The next day her
body had been found in the marshland
near the bay.
It was a terrible and shocking thing.
But there was something else, another
circumstance, that made it even more
terrifying and threatening to the parents
of the neighborhood. It had happened
before. Almost a year before, a little boy
from the same area had disappeared in
almost the same way; and the police
were saying that it looked as if the guilty
person was a resident of the
neighborhood.
As the days passed and no arrests
were made, fear and suspicion grew and
spread in all directions; and a great
silence began to settle over Orchard
Avenue and the streets and alleys on
either side.
Twice a day a few children could be
seen walking to and from school, but
they went quickly and in larger groups
than usual; and many other parents
arranged car pools, even for children
who had only a few blocks to walk.
Afternoons and weekends, which usually
rang with a medley of shouts and
laughter and pounding feet, dragged by
in a strange, uneasy silence broken only
by the dull hum of traffic.
But although fear made a great
silence out-of-doors, inside the homes
and stores and apartments it had a
different sound—it talked and it talked
and it talked. For the boys and girls,
talking was about all there was left to
do, since nobody was being allowed to
play outside. Lying across a bed, or
sitting on one of the Casa Rosada's little
iron balconies, April and Melanie talked
it over many times. Most of their special
information, besides what they read in
the papers, came from Mrs. Ross by way
of Melanie. Caroline didn't seem to
know how to talk about important or
shocking things, and April wouldn't
have asked her.
"I wonder why anyone would do an
awful thing like that?" April asked one
day while she and Melanie were sitting
on the floor in Melanie's bedroom,
looking through old magazines for new
people for the paper-families game. "On
TV and in the movies when somebody
gets killed it's usually because of money,
or else revenge. But little kids don't
have that much money and there's all
sorts of ways to get revenge on kids
without doing a thing like that."
Melanie looked at April curiously.
She'd noticed before that April, in spite
of her sophisticated ways, really didn't
know much at all about certain kinds of
things. The kinds of things parents tell
their children when they're alone
together and other kids tell you if they
know you really well. All April's
information seemed to be the kind of
things grown-ups let you overhear, and
of course, nearly everything she could
find in the children's part of libraries.
"They do it because they're sick,"
Melanie answered. "That's what my
mom says. It's a sickness of the mind.
They can't help themselves, so there's
no use hating them, but they just have to
be caught and shut up or they'll probably
do it again."
"But why can't they catch him, if he's
crazy? It seems to me a crazy person
wouldn't be hard to catch."
"It's not like that," Melanie said. "My
mom says some people who are crazy
are only crazy at times, or in certain
ways. Most of the time they seem just
like anybody. My mom says that's why
kids have to be careful about all
strangers, no matter if they seem as nice
as anything."
"Yeah," April said. "I guess that's
right. You can usually tell about people
if you watch them hard, but I guess you
can't always. Hey, look. Here's a mother
who's just right for the haunted house
family. Isn't she weird?"
It wasn't only the boys and girls of
Orchard Avenue who talked and talked.
The grown-ups did, too. Everybody had
theories and opinions, and everybody
had heard rumors they were eager to
repeat. There was one rumor that was
particularly persistent and particularly
troublesome to the members of the Egypt
Game. It had to do with the Professor.
Someone had seen two policemen
going into the Professor's store on the
morning after the little girl had
disappeared. It looked as if he must be a
suspect, at least. No one knew that the
Professor was guilty; but at the same
time, no one knew anything about him
that would make them believe he was
innocent. There were other people in the
neighborhood who were noted for their
bad tempers or downright meanness, but
their actions were predictable. For
instance, you knew that Mrs. Harkness
would call the police if you stepped on
her lawn, and that at Schmitt's Variety
Store you'd get cheated out of small
change if you weren't careful. But how
could anyone know what a person like
the Professor would do? Of course, he
hadn't been arrested yet, but that might
only mean that the police hadn't found
the proof.
Only the Egypt gang maintained that
the Professor was innocent. April said
she was sure of it because of a feeling
she had. As just about the only kid in the
neighborhood who'd actually talked to
the Professor, she felt she was entitled to
have feelings about what he might do.
Melanie and Elizabeth thought the
Professor was innocent because April
did. And, without really admitting it
even to themselves, all three of them
kept thinking he must be innocent
because if he was guilty the Egypt Game
was ruined forever. Nobody plays games
in the backyard of a murderer.
But apparently there were other
people who were just as firmly
convinced of the old man's guilt. Three
days after the murder someone threw a
brick through one of his store's show
windows, and Mr. Schmitt organized a
not-so-secret campaign to get people to
write letters and sign petitions inviting
the Professor to leave the neighborhood.
The fact that the Professor sold old and
cheap some of the things that Mr. Schmitt
sold new and expensive was worth
thinking about; but it really didn't prove
anything one way or the other.
Without the Egypt Game the days
were very slow for the four Egyptians.
Once or twice they tried to play the
Game indoors, before the grown-ups
were at home of course; but it wasn't the
same at all. In fact, it was such a
disappointment that it was frightening.
What if the magic was gone forever? But
probably it was only that carpets and
couches and curtains just didn't make the
right atmosphere for a game about
hidden splendors and giant mysteries, in
a land of mud and sand. Anyway, they
decided instead to spend their time
making some things they could use when
they finally could return to Egypt.
Elizabeth, who was very clever and
artistic with her hands, started the
costume idea by making herself a
Nefertiti headdress out of a plastic
bleach bottle with the top cut off. Next,
Melanie got some old curtains from her
mother, enough to make sheer flowing
robes for everyone. The sheer robes
were to be worn over short tunics made
of pillowcases.
It was April who got the idea of
going around the apartment house and
asking all the ladies if they had any old
junk jewelry that they were willing to
sell. Just as she predicted, most people
gave them stuff and refused to take any
money, which was just as well, since
they only had nineteen cents between
them. Some of the jewelry they took
apart and glued or sewed onto their
robes for decoration; but some of the
necklaces and bracelets that looked a
little bit Egyptian they used just as they
were.
Their most successful creation was
Marshall's costume. One day when they
were all working in the Rosses'
apartment, Marshall got out his indoor
bowling game. The ball and tenpins
were made of a light plastic, so as not to
dent up the furniture. April was watching
him set up the pins and suddenly got a
brilliant idea. She went upstairs, got one
of her Egypt books, and showed the rest
of them that the tenpins were shaped
exactly like the inner part of the double
crown of Egypt. The outer part could be
made of another bleach bottle. Melanie
wasn't sure they ought to use up one of
Marshall's tenpins; but April pointed out
that there was nothing wrong with the
game of ninepins. And, anyway, they
were Marshall's and he was all for it
when he found out the crown was to be
for him. When it was all put together and
painted, with a cardboard vulture's head
and cobra glued to the front, it looked so
impressive they could hardly believe
they'd made it themselves.
With no place to work but their own
rooms, it wasn't long, of course, until
their families knew the girls were
making Egyptian costumes. But
fortunately a simple and logical
explanation was handy. Halloween
wasn't far away and making costumes
was a perfectly natural thing to be doing.
As the days went by, the headlines
about the terrible thing that had
happened near Orchard Avenue got
smaller and smaller. The paper said the
police were "following up leads" and
"investigating clues," but no arrests
were made and gradually people
stopped talking about it so much. The
Professor still stubbornly opened his
store every day, but now he had almost
no local trade. The few people who had
gone in now and then to look over his
used merchandise department were
staying away, and only an occasional
out-of-town antique buyer was seen
entering his store. People wondered how
he managed to stay in business, and they
wondered if he was really guilty, and
they wondered . . . But wondering takes
time, and most of the people of the
neighborhood were hard-working
people, and so they gradually began to
forget. And very gradually the children
began to play out-of-doors again. But the
Rosses and Mrs. Chung were
frustratingly careful parents, and it
looked as if they were going to be the
very last ones to stop worrying. Of
course, Caroline Hall hadn't given April
permission to play outside either; but she
didn't get home until 5:30, and April just
might have been willing to do a little
private forgetting on her own if she'd
had anyone to keep her company. But
since Elizabeth and Melanie were stuck
inside, April figured she might as well
be, too.
The waiting was particularly hard on
April because, without the Egypt Game
to think about, it was more difficult to
keep from thinking about other things. At
first it was the empty mailbox to try not
to think about—not a single letter from
Dorothea for over a month. And then at
last there was a letter—and even more
to worry about. Dorothea was back in
Hollywood. She must have gotten all of
April's letters, but she didn't even
mention the question that April asked in
every one. Dorothea wrote about her
tour, and about her new job in a
nightclub, and about Nick; but she said
nothing at all about April's coming
home.
As the days dragged by, the Egypt
gang grew more and more impatient.
They knew that Egypt was waiting for
them just as they had left it because
several times they had been able to stop
by on their way to school. They had had
time to notice things—important things
—like the fact that the Crocodile Stone
seemed to have moved a tiny bit, a sure
sign of its sinister power, and that the
flowers on the altar of Nefertiti stayed
fresh much longer than you'd expect, as
if in tribute to her beauty. But there was
no time for a real game because Mrs.
Ross had arranged for a neighbor lady
who didn't work to make sure they
arrived home safely and on time.
So the days passed and the Egyptian
clothing grew fancier and all sorts of
new plans were made for the time when
they could return to Egypt.
Summoned by the
Mighty Ones
RIGHT UP UNTIL A FEW DAYS BEFORE THE
END OF the month it really looked as if
Halloween was going to be completely
wasted. Of course, there was going to be
a program at school and kids who
wanted to could wear their costumes to
afternoon classes, but only little primary
kids got very excited about that. The real
fun of Halloween, trick-or-treating and
being allowed to tear around out-ofdoors
late at night, was absolutely out.
At least that was what all the parents in
the neighborhood were saying all month
long. Unless, of course, the murderer had
been caught by then. But as day after day
went by with nothing new in the papers,
there seemed little hope of that. And
then, with only three more days to go,
suddenly there was good news.
At a P.T.A. meeting at Wilson School,
a couple of really red-blooded mothers
stood up and volunteered their husbands
to take large groups of trick-or-treaters
around the neighborhood. Before long
some other fathers got shamed or nagged
into doing the same thing, and by the day
before Halloween nearly all the kids at
Wilson were signed up to go around
trick-or-treating with some large,
chaperoned group.
Mr. Barkley and Mr. Kamata were
going to be the chaperones for all the
kids who lived in the Casa Rosada and
the rest of the eight hundred block of
Orchard Avenue. Mr. Barkley was the
father of some six-year-old twins who
lived on the first floor of the Casa
Rosada, and Mr. Kamata was from
Kamata's Realty, just across the street,
and the father of Ken Kamata, who was
in April and Melanie's class at Wilson.
April had it figured out that there were at
least twenty-five kids who would be
going with Mr. Barkley and Mr. Kamata,
and that was a lot of kids to keep track
of, particularly in the dark. Which
opened the way for a fascinating and
frightening scheme.
If, April decided, the Egypt gang all
stayed together, there might be a chance
to slip away from the big group to pay a
visit to Egypt. Their flashlights and jacko'-lanterns
would be enough to light up
the storage yard at least a little, and it
would be really terrific—a nighttime
ceremony in the spooky half-light, and
with everybody wearing their new
Egyptian costumes. They would only
stay for a few minutes, and they'd get
back to the trick-or-treaters before they
were missed.
When April first told Melanie about
her plan, Melanie thought it was just
about the most exciting idea she'd ever
heard. She agreed to everything, even to
not telling Elizabeth until Halloween
night so that she wouldn't have too long
to worry about it. Elizabeth had a
tendency to worry about things like not
having permission. She might not
understand that it was not at all like
being downright disobedient. As April
pointed out, no one had forbidden them
to visit Egypt on Halloween night.
Melanie did just mention that maybe that
was because nobody knew about Egypt;
but April just grinned and said, "Yeah, I
know. Lucky, isn't it."
Later, when Melanie began to think
about it in private, she began to have
some doubts. Even though the Egypt gang
had decided that the Professor was
innocent, what if they just might be
wrong? Or what if the Professor was
innocent, but the somebody else who
wasn't really did live right in the
neighborhood, as so many people
seemed to think? In that case a trip to
Egypt might be a lot worse than
downright disobedient. It might be
deadly dangerous. Downright
disobedient and deadly dangerous. The
two phrases seemed to get stuck in
Melanie's head. The night before
Halloween she woke up several times
with those four words throbbing through
her thoughts. By morning she'd decided
to tell April that she'd changed her mind.
But the next day Melanie had an
early-morning piano lesson, so there
was no time to talk to April before
school. And at school there were always
too many people around. Even though
Melanie tried all day to find an
opportunity, she still hadn't told April
about her decision when the time came
to get into their costumes.
April had been keeping all the
costumes in a box in her closet, and it
had been decided that they would all get
ready at her place. On the way up
Melanie and Marshall met Elizabeth in
the hall. Melanie had been almost hoping
that Elizabeth would have her two
sisters along. That would have put an
end to the Egypt question without her
having to say anything. But no such luck.
Elizabeth explained that her little sisters
were staying home because they were
afraid of the dark and of all the big kids
in their costumes.
When they reached April's apartment,
Mrs. Hall met them at the door. "Come
in, come in," she said. "April's all
dressed already. She's in her room."
April looked great. She was wearing
her Egyptian headdress and under her
sheer jeweled robe she had on the short
tunic made of a pillowcase. Around the
bottom of the pillowcase there were
Egyptian-looking decorations done in
red and black crayon. But best of all
were her face and hair. For once her
false eyelashes were on straight, and she
had heavy black eye makeup that made
her eyes look long and mysterious. But
most surprising was her hair—it was cut
short in a sort of Cleopatra bob.
"Caroline helped me with my face
and hair," April said, and she looked at
Caroline and smiled. It occurred to
Melanie that it was the first time she'd
ever seen April smile at her
grandmother. It also occurred to her that
April wasn't going to be able to wear an
upsweep anymore, but she didn't say
anything about that.
Instead, she only said, "Your hair
looks terrific, April. You ought to wear
it that way all the time."
Mrs. Hall reminded them that they
better hurry so they wouldn't keep the
other trick-or-treaters waiting and then
she went out and left them alone. April
shut the door of her room behind her
grandmother and then she turned around
very slowly and dramatically to face the
rest of the Egypt gang. One look at her
face and Melanie had a strong feeling
that downright disobedient and even
deadly dangerous weren't going to be
enough. She felt herself slipping before
she was even sure of the direction in
which they were moving.
April put her arms down stiffly along
her sides and with her eyes closed she
tilted her Egyptian face upward raptly.
To Melanie she looked like a miniature
monolith, glowing with mystery. "We
have received a message," April
whispered with her eyes still closed.
"We are summoned by the mighty ones,
the mighty ones of Egypt."
"The mighty ones?" Elizabeth's voice
quavered a little.
April snapped back into life and
snatched up something from her dresser.
It was a little velvet pin-cushion box that
she kept special things on. "It's in here,"
she said, holding the box out
dramatically until they had all gathered
around.
"The summons from Set and Isis,"
Melanie said. It was a statement instead
of a question; and with a last lingering
dismay she realized that she was already
using her high priestess voice. April
nodded and her eyes flicked across
Melanie's in the way they always did
when their imaginations were tuned in.
The gods of Egypt struggled with the
gods of conscience, and Egypt won.
"The mighty ones have summoned us,"
Melanie chanted and dropped to her
knees.
Following Melanie's lead, April was
on her knees almost as quickly and
Elizabeth and Marshall weren't far
behind. Slowly and with drama April
opened the box. There, on a cushion of
paper handkerchiefs, was a single shiny
feather. "Just a few minutes ago," April
whispered, "I heard something—a
strange sound—outside my window. I'd
been expecting something. I'd had a
weird feeling all day long. Hadn't you?"
They all nodded and Melanie didn't
even remember what kind of feelings
she'd really been having all day. "So I
ran to the window and threw it open and
there it was—right on the sill. A token—
from the mighty ones."
"Evil Set and Beautiful Isis have sent
us a token," Melanie chanted. She
nudged Elizabeth with her elbow and
whispered, "You say, ‘The mighty ones
have summoned us to their temple.' "
"The mighty ones have summoned us
to their temple." Elizabeth imitated
Melanie's singing chant.
April poked Marshall. "You say, ‘We
have received your summons, O mighty
ones.' "
"We have received your summons, O
mighty ones," Marshall chanted and then
ad-libbed, "and it's nothing but an old
pigeon feather." He scanned the girls'
faces expectantly, but they chose to
ignore him.
While they were getting into their
costumes, Elizabeth asked a few
worried questions about what they were
going to do, but April only said, "I don't
know. We'll have to stick close together
and look for a sign."
"What sort of a sign?" Elizabeth
wanted to know.
"A secret omen," Melanie said.
"Will it be a pigeon feather?"
Marshall asked.
"We don't know what it will be,"
April told him. "But we will know it
when it appears." She clasped her hands
and struck a wonder-and-amazement
pose. "The very air will smell of
mystery," she breathed.
Marshall sniffed thoughtfully as April
got him into his crown and robe and
tried to make his baby-round eyes look
long and mysterious with the eyebrow
pencil. She was more successful with
Elizabeth's and Melanie's eyes. They
both had beautiful eyes anyway—
Elizabeth's were exotic, long and tilted,
and Melanie's were luxurious, velvet
and ivory, fringed with black silk. With
the Egyptian makeup they both looked
fantastic.
By the time they had gotten
Elizabeth's ponytail tucked inside her
Nefertiti headdress it was almost 7:00.
They started to rush out, but in the
hallway they noticed that Marshall
wasn't with them. They dashed back and
found him in the closet with April's pinbox.
He was calm as they grabbed him
out of the closet, snatched away the pinbox
and scolded him across the living
room to the hall door. "I was just
smelling the mystery, like April said," he
was explaining patiently, when suddenly
he grabbed hold of the door frame and
howled, "STOP!" The result was a fourway
collision of Egyptians in the
doorway. Marshall kept on yelling,
"Stop!" and Elizabeth yelled "Ouch!"
because somebody stepped on her, and
April yelled, "What the———!"
But Melanie knew right away what
the matter was. She ran back into the
bedroom and got Security from where
he'd been left on April's bed, and at last
the Egyptians were on their way.
The Return to Egypt
THE TRICK-OR-TREAT GROUP WAS A
MILLING MOB of devils, witches, tramps
and monsters. Mr. Barkley, who always
acted as if being the father of six-yearold
twin boys was almost more than he
could stand, looked positively
exhausted; and even Mr. Kamata's sturdy
real-estate-salesman's smile was
beginning to wilt. Outside the Casa
Rosada a black cat, a mechanical man, a
Little Red Riding Hood, two tramps and
four ancient Egyptians joined the already
unwieldy group.
They had started off up Orchard
Avenue in a sprawly column when
Marshall suddenly stopped and tugged at
Melanie's arm. "I want a sign," he said
loudly. Several of the surrounding trickor-treaters
turned to look at him, and the
other three Egyptians stared in
astonishment. Marshall had never
blabbed about secrets before.
"Shhh!" April hissed. "Not yet! I'll
tell you when."
"Shhh, Marshall. It's a secret,"
Elizabeth whispered covering his mouth
with her hand.
"What's the matter with you?"
Melanie asked in astonishment.
Marshall pushed Elizabeth's hand
away. "Not a secret sign," he said. "A
sign to carry."
All of a sudden Melanie laughed.
"Oh," she said, "I guess he thinks we're
a demonstration—like at the university.
He's never been trick-or-treating
because he was too young last year. But
he knows about demonstrations."
Everybody laughed, except Marshall.
"We're not a demonstration, Marshall,"
Melanie explained, tugging at him to get
him moving again. "We're trick-ortreating.
Trick-or-treating is for candy
and demonstrations are for things like
Peace and Freedom. It's different."
Marshall relaxed and allowed
himself to be pulled down the street, but
he didn't look convinced. "I'm a
demonstration," he said firmly.
When the crowd turned up Elm Street
where there were more good houses to
visit, the Egyptians began to drop to the
rear of the group where it would be
easier to get away. That meant they were
the last ones up to each home, and
sometimes most of the good stuff was
already taken; but they hardly noticed.
They were too busy looking for an omen.
At the last house before they turned
off Elm Street, the Egypt gang started up
the front walk and collided with two
other trick-or-treaters who also seemed
to be hanging behind the main group—a
monster and a walking pile of boxes.
"Hey," the monster said, "it's Ross and
February. What are you supposed to
be?"
The rubber monster mask completely
covered the speaker's head, but the
voice was familiar; and besides, the
sixth-grade boys were the only ones who
called April, February. Then the walking
boxes said, "Hey man! It's a whole herd
of Egyptians." He poked Marshall in the
stomach and said, "Hi there, King Tut."
"Okay, Mr. Wise-Guy Alvillar,"
Melanie said. "I know who you are."
She turned to April with an exasperated
shrug. "It's Kamata and Alvillar."
Ken Kamata and Toby Alvillar were
just about the most disgusting boys in the
sixth grade, in a fascinating sort of way.
They were best friends and always
together, and everybody always voted
for them for everything and wanted to be
on their team. But not April and
Melanie. April and Melanie always told
each other that Ken and Toby were just
ordinary (ugh) boys, and it was stupid
the way everybody treated them so
special. April and Melanie just couldn't
figure out what people saw in them.
Of course, Toby had a special talent
for getting people off the hook by making
the teacher laugh. Just when Mrs.
Granger was really building up a head of
steam over something, Toby would make
some little remark and Mrs. Granger
would start choking and have to turn her
back. Sometimes she'd try to pick things
up where she left off, but all that lost
momentum made a big difference.
Ken was sort of cute in a big blunt
cocky way. He had a clean-cut allAmerican-Asian
look about him, and he
walked with a high-school swagger.
Toby was thinner, with big ears that
stuck out of his shaggy hair and
enormous brown eyes that were always
up to something, like a pair of TV
screens turned on full blast. But right
now you couldn't see what either one of
them really looked like at all.
Ken had a man's old overcoat on
over a pillow-padded hunchback, and
(wouldn't you know it) rubber monster
hands and feet, too, as well as the mask.
Ken's father sold a lot of real estate and
he could afford expensive stuff like that.
Toby was the box man. He had a small
box over his head, with a Saran Wrapcovered
opening shaped like a TV
screen to look out through. The rest of
him was covered with all sorts of other
boxes all strung together and painted
black and covered with pasted-on ads
out of papers and magazines. There were
Alka-Seltzer and Pepto-Bismol ads
pasted on his stomach box, aspirin ads
on his head box, and even a deodorant
ad under his left arm.
"Boy! Are you two in character,"
April said. "A monster and a pile of
junk."
"I'll have you know that I represent
the New American," Toby said
haughtily. Then he grinned. "It was my
dad's idea. He says it's a new art form
he just invented."
Toby's dad had been a graduate
student at the university. He was also a
sculptor who made statues out of all
kinds of junk.
"An art form!" April said. "Well, all I
can say is—"
"Don't," Toby interrupted. "You'd
just show off your ignorance."
"Come on, Tobe," Ken said. "We're
getting left behind."
"Yeah, you little kids ought to keep up
with the group better," Toby said, as he
started off up the sidewalk. "You're
liable to get hurt."
"Little kids!" Melanie yelled after
him. "Look who's talking!"
Marshall ran after Toby and gave him
a shove on the rear of his biggest box.
"We're not little kids," he said. "We're
Egyptians."
Toby swiveled his TV head around
and surveyed the damage. "Hey, watch
it!" he said. "You just bent my Jockey
shorts ad."
April and Melanie didn't believe in
encouraging Toby by laughing at him, but
that was too much. By the time the
Egyptians got over their convulsions of
giggles, Ken and Toby had disappeared
around the corner, and the lady whose
walk they were on was calling to ask if
they wanted some candy or not.
After that Melanie suggested that
maybe they'd better stay up with the
group a little better or the fathers would
notice and start watching them. But even
when they were trying, it wasn't easy to
catch up because their costumes were
such a success. At almost every house
they had to be admired and questioned
and other members of the family had to
be called to see them—particularly
Elizabeth and Marshall. Everyone
thought Elizabeth and Marshall were just
"darling," and "adorable," and they had
to be admired and fussed over before the
Egyptians could take their candy and
leave.
At last, at one house they had to wait
while the man got his flash camera out to
take their picture, and when they finally
got away and rushed down the stairs the
big group of trick-or-treaters had
completely disappeared.
There they were, all alone on the
dimly lit sidewalk, and it was suddenly
very quiet. They ran down the block to
the corner, where they could look all
four ways, but still there wasn't a person
in sight. They were still just standing
there looking around and wondering
what to do, when suddenly Melanie
pointed at the horizon. "Look," she said.
"A shooting star!"
"A shooting star!" Everybody
repeated it in whispered unison as if
they'd been rehearsed. Then everybody
looked at April. She nodded. "The
secret omen," she said slowly, making
every syllable heavy with significance.
Marshall started turning around and
around, smelling the air.
Looking around one last time to be
sure no one was watching, the girls
grabbed Marshall out of his tailspin and
started down the sidewalk in the
direction that they had come. They
scurried down two blocks without
seeing a soul, turned the corner, and a
moment later ducked into the alley that
led to Egypt.
If the secret and mysterious land of
Egypt was fascinating in the daytime, it
was doubly so at night. Dimly lit by a
distant streetlight, two flashlights, and a
jack-o'-lantern, it was almost too
fascinating to bear. April told everyone
to wait just inside the fence while she
tiptoed forward and lit the cone of
incense on the altar of Set and the two
candles that stood before the goddess
Isis. Then she motioned everyone
forward.
"The Great Ceremony of the
Celebration of the Return to Egypt has
begun!" she chanted, and all four
Egyptians prostrated themselves before
the egg crate and the birdbath.
Egypt Invaded
APRIL AND MELANIE ROSE TO THEIR
KNEES FROM their deep bows before the
double altars of Egypt. Over the heads of
Elizabeth and Marshall they exchanged a
glance that said, "Okay. What's next?"
Melanie reached over absently to help
Marshall with his pharaoh's crown,
which had slipped down over his eyes
while he was touching his forehead to
the floor. Suddenly her eyes lit up with
an "I have it" expression. She gave the
crown a final tug down over Marshall's
ears and turned to face the altar of Set.
She raised her arms and April quickly
followed suit.
"The gods are angry at us for being
gone so long," she chanted.
"The gods are angry," April repeated.
A quick glare at Elizabeth and Marshall
got them going.
"The gods are angry," they parroted.
Melanie nodded and continued with
her inspiration. "The gods demand that
we make a sacrifice so that we may be
forgiven." She looked over at April, and
April nodded delightedly.
"The gods demand that we make a
horrible and bloody sacrifice." April
took up Melanie's theme with relish.
"A horrible and bloody sacrifice,"
Melanie agreed.
"A horrible and bloody sacrifice,"
Marshall and Elizabeth repeated
dutifully, but Elizabeth's voice quavered
a little and Marshall leaned over and
poked his sister.
"What sort of bloody?" he demanded
in a whisper.
But now April was off and away, and
Melanie was following. "The gods will
tell us what the sacrifice must be," April
said. "We must approach the altar one at
a time and touch the Crocodile Stone, the
sacred symbol of Set. We must touch the
sacred symbol of Set and wait for a
message about the sacrifice. Then we
will decide whose message is the best."
April went first. She approached the
egg crate using the correct Egyptian
walk, which was done by walking with
your shoulders sideways, arms held out
from the body and bent sharply at the
wrist. In front of the altar she bowed
deeply with her head tucked between her
upraised arms, and then placed her
fingertips on the Crocodile Stone. She
stood for a minute with her face turned
upward. Melanie poked the other kids
and motioned for them to watch closely.
When April stalked back to them
looking wildly secretive, Melanie
walked up to the altar and followed her
example, doing exactly the same things.
Then came Elizabeth's turn and finally
Marshall's. Then they all sat down in a
circle on the floor.
As soon as everyone was seated,
Elizabeth raised her hand and shook it
frantically. She was looking excited and
pleasantly surprised with herself. She
had just had a terribly daring idea and
she couldn't wait to tell it.
"All right, Elizabeth first," Melanie
said. "Okay, April?"
April nodded. "Go ahead,
Neferbeth," she said, "but put your hand
down, for heaven's sake. You're not in
school, you're a lady pharaoh."
Elizabeth snatched her hand down
and suggested eagerly that Set's message
was that they should stick their fingers
with a needle and write him a letter in
their own blood.
April and Melanie exchanged
surprised and appreciative glances, and
Elizabeth beamed proudly. She didn't
think it was necessary to mention that her
teacher had just read Tom Sawyer to the
class—and just possibly Set had had a
little help from Mark Twain.
However, there was one small detail
—nobody had a needle. Elizabeth
looked crushed. "Don't feel bad, Bethy,"
Melanie said. "It was a neat idea."
"I'll say," April agreed. "It was a
terrific idea."
"It was a dumb idea," Marshall
muttered. "When you stick your finger
you get infested."
"Infected," Melanie corrected. "You
go next, April."
April made a trance-like face. "When
I stood before the altar," she chanted, "I
heard the voice of the Crocodile god. He
said the object to be sacrificed must be
something very dear to us. It must be
something we hate to part with.
Otherwise it won't count. The Crocodile
god has told me that we must
sacrifice"—she pointed dramatically
—"Security!"
"NO!" Marshall shouted, jumping up
and hugging Security to his chest. "NO!
NO! NO!" With every shout he stamped
his foot. All three girls were around him
in a moment, shushing and begging him
to keep still. He shushed, but he went
over to the edge of the shed and stood
with his back to them.
"All right, Marshall. We won't
sacrifice Security. Will we, April?"
Melanie said.
April went into a quick trance with
her fingers to her forehead. "The gods
have changed their minds," she
announced in a moment. "They say they
don't want Security. But just don't yell
like that anymore. Somebody will hear
us, and we'll get caught."
"Somebody already heard us,"
Marshall muttered darkly.
"What do you mean, somebody
already heard us?" Melanie gasped. But
Marshall only shrugged and said nothing
more.
"Come on back to the circle,"
Melanie coaxed. "We take it all back
about Security. Besides, it's your turn to
say what the message was."
Marshall allowed himself to be led
back to the circle, but his chin was still
sticking out, and he was glaring at April.
He put his hand to his forehead the way
April had done and then jerked it away.
"Let's sacrifice April," he suggested.
That gave everybody the giggles, and
finally Marshall broke down and smiled,
too. Then it was Melanie's turn. Melanie
said that she had read about some people
who cut off their fingers as sacrifices. At
that point even April looked shocked,
and Elizabeth almost fainted. But
Melanie only laughed. "I didn't mean we
should do that," she said. "It just gave
me an idea. We could pull out some
hairs—and maybe cut off some
fingernails."
"No scissors," Elizabeth reminded
with just a touch of satisfaction.
"We could bite them off," April
suggested. "I do it all the time."
A few minutes later a small fire of
twisted paper was burning in the mixing
bowl firepit, and the high priestesses
(and junior high priest) of Egypt were
parading in a circle before the altar.
They were walking in the Egyptian
manner—one shoulder forward, arms
bent at the wrist—except from time to
time when they had to chew off another
fingernail. Now and then one or another
would approach the altar, bow and drop
a scrap of humanity on the flames: a hair
or two or a shred of fingernail.
It was just about the best ceremony
they'd ever had, and it was a shame to
end it; but Melanie was just thinking that
perhaps it was time to leave when
suddenly she heard Elizabeth give a gasp
of pure terror. Following Elizabeth's
gaze, Melanie was horrified to see a
huge misshapen figure teetering on the
top of the high board fence. The figure
teetered wildly in the dim light, and then
sprang forward to land in a horrible
threatening crouch, right in the middle of
Egypt.
Elizabethan
Diplomacy
WHEN THE SHAPELESS INHUMAN FIGURE
SPRANG INTO the middle of the storage
yard, the four Egyptians could only
clutch each other in panic, too shocked
for the moment to even scream. April
had just managed to get her mouth open
to yell for help, when suddenly Marshall
pointed and said, "Look." A second
figure was appearing over the top of the
fence.
This second invader, who was having
some difficulty climbing over the wire at
the top of the fence, had a strangely
angular look about him. Strangely
angular—and strangely familiar. In all
four Egyptians frozen fear boiled at once
into a choking mixture of anger and
relief. In April it overflowed in
stuttering sputter. "You—you d-d-dirty ff-finks!"
she yelled.
On top of the fence Toby finally
managed to get his boxy legs free of the
barbed wire. He jumped down, losing
his TV head in the process. Then, as the
four badly shaken Egyptians turned loose
of each other and tried to regain their
dignity, the monster and the box-man
leaned on each other and choked with
fiendish laughter.
They laughed leaning on each other
and standing up—bending over as if they
were in pain—and finally collapsed,
sitting flat on the ground. Then, while the
four members of the Egypt gang stared at
them in helpless fuming anger, they just
sat there, leaning against each other's
backs, still shaking with gradually
weakening seizures.
"Man—oh—man!" Toby gasped
finally. "I've got to quit laughing. My
stomach's killing me."
"Sheesh! Me too," Ken said. "I'm
dying." Ken fell over backwards and
just lay there, holding his stomach and
saying "Sheesh" weakly from time to
time. But Toby crossed his legs and
leaned forward with his chin on one
hand and stared at the angry Egyptians.
"Hey, February," he said finally.
"How do you say panic button in
Egyptian?"
April clenched her fists and took a
step forward. Toby started to scramble
to his feet—he'd seen April in action
before. But Melanie and Elizabeth
grabbed her and held her back.
"Turn loose," April said. "I'm going
to punch him in the nose."
"There's no use doing that," Melanie
whispered. "That won't do any good.
We can't keep them from telling on us by
punching them in the nose."
After a moment's consideration April
nodded. "Okay. Turn loose. I won't
punch them. At least not till we find out
what they're going to do." She
unclenched her fists and all three girls
approached the enemy. Left behind,
Marshall sat down on the edge of the
temple floor in a good position to watch
everything that might happen. Both the
boys were standing now, watching the
girls warily.
"Well," Melanie began. "Are you
going to tell on us, or not?"
"Tell on you?" Ken said. "What
makes you think we'd do a thing like
that?"
"Of course not," Toby said. "We
don't go around finking on people." The
girls glanced at each other in surprised
relief. "However," Toby continued, "this
is not a matter of plain and simple
finking. Letting you Egyptians get away
with all this secret stuff just might be
considered—like, unpatriotic, or
something."
"Hey, you're right," Ken said.
"Maybe we ought to tell the F.B.I."
"Maybe we should. Or maybe we
could just make an official report on the
whole scene—like, for current events
tomorrow morning." Toby stalked to the
middle of the yard in what was
obviously meant to be the Egyptian
walk. Then he faced the group, cleared
his throat, and in a phony voice he said,
" ‘What's Happening in Egypt'—a very
official report by Tobias Alvillar, Secret
Agent."
Toby was pretty funny all right, but no
one laughed but Ken. April was thinking
a horrible thought. If they knew about the
Egyptian walk, how much else did they
know? Up until then she'd been thinking
that the fence was too high to look over
—and they couldn't have seen very much
while they were scrambling over it. She
ran to the loose board and looked out
into the alley. When she pulled her head
back in, Melanie guessed the awful truth
before she heard it.
Taking Melanie aside, April
whispered, "There are boxes piled up
out there. They could have been
watching forever! Shall I punch them
now?"
Melanie shrugged hopelessly. "Go
ahead if you want to. But it won't do any
good. I think we might as well—leave
the country, or something."
Elizabeth had followed Melanie and
listened to April's horrible news. Now
all of a sudden she said, "I have an
idea."
Both the bigger girls looked
surprised. Elizabeth wasn't the kind of
person you expect to come up with ideas
in an emergency. But the situation was
desperate, so April and Melanie
listened.
When Elizabeth finished whispering,
April shook her head gloomily. "It'll
never work," she said.
"Well, we may as well try it,"
Melanie said. "It can't make things any
worse."
The enemy watched cautiously as the
girls returned to face them. For a few
seconds April and Melanie couldn't
think of a way to get started, and the five
of them just stood there staring at each
other. Melanie spoke first.
"We don't have permission to be here
from the Professor, or our folks or
anybody."
Toby grinned. "So what else is new?"
he said.
April's fists clenched but she forced
herself to open them. "We'll be in
terrible trouble if you tell on us," she
said in as pitiful a voice as she could
manage. To her amazement she noticed
that the look the two boys exchanged
was just the tiniest bit confused. And
Kamata and Alvillar were two guys who
weren't easy to confuse. Warming to her
theme, she went on, "We'll probably get
beaten and everything."
There was no doubt about it, the
enemy had faltered for a few moments,
but they managed to regroup.
"We're crying," Ken said. "See the
tears."
"Yeah. We'll come to your funerals,"
Toby said.
Just then Elizabeth pushed her way
between April and Melanie. Everyone
looked at her in surprise—she'd
probably never spoken to a sixth-grade
boy before in her life, but now she
looked as if she meant to. "Please," she
said, in a feathery little voice. "Please
d
o
n
'
t
t
e
l
l
o
n
us
,
a
nd
w
e
'
l
l
l
e
t
yo
u
p
l
a
y,
t
o
o."

April cringed. It was such a corny,
baby thing to say. She had a crazy urge to
grab Elizabeth and drag her out of
wisecrack range, before she got hurt. But
seconds passed and nobody pounced.
April unsquinched her eyes. Strangely
enough, the boys were looking confused
again. More confused than ever.
Elizabeth was looking shyly hopeful,
like an un-spanked puppy.
Then Ken blinked his eyes like
someone coming to after a whack on the
head. "Come on, Tobe, let's get out of
here," he said. And then, to no one in
particular, "Maybe we won't fink on you
guys. You never can tell. Maybe we just
won't be in the mood for finking. Huh,
Tobe?" But Toby only nodded absently.
Ken picked up Toby's T.V. head and
jammed it into his hands. "Come on,
Tobe," he said. "We've got to get back
before my dad misses me."
But Toby appeared to be thinking. He
nodded again slowly and then walked
around the girls to the temple. He looked
for a moment at each altar and then
around the yard. When he came back his
eyes had a faraway look.
"Okay," he said. "Okay. We don't rat,
and we get to join the game. Is it a
deal?"
"Join the game!" Ken said. "This
game? Are you kidding? We could make
a deal about using the yard—like for"—
he paused and glanced around—"foursquare
or handball or something, but—"
He caught a glimpse of Toby's face, and
his voice trailed off. Toby was lit up like
a pinball machine. Ken shrugged
philosophically. "Okay," he said. "So
we're Egyptians. It figures."
From then on things happened fast.
Toby made everybody take a solemn
oath not to tell where they'd been, even
if they'd been missed and people started
asking questions. Then, there was a brief
crisis over getting Toby out of the yard.
He wouldn't fit through the hole in the
fence with his boxes on, and the big box
the boys had used for climbing over was
too big and heavy to throw into the yard.
He couldn't take his costume off because
he didn't think he could get back into it
without his dad's help, and it wouldn't
be wise to rejoin the trick-or-treat group
in pieces. Finally he lay down on the
ground and had everybody stomp on him,
more or less gently (less, in the case of
April, who was still mad) until the
boxes were flattened enough to squeeze
through the hole. Afterwards, they tried
to square him back up, but he never did
look quite the same.
As soon as they'd carried off the
boxes the boys had piled up to climb on,
they started off after the trick-or-treat
group. Fortunately Ken knew the line of
march, and since they didn't stop at any
houses, it wasn't too long until they
caught up. They even had time to collect
a few more treats before it was time to
go home.
But it would have taken more than a
few pieces of cheap candy to console
April and Melanie. After they got the
two smaller kids uncostumed and sent
home, they sat on April's bed and stared
at each other gloomily.
"What are we going to do?" April
said finally. "We just can't play the
Egypt Game with those—those—boys
there."
"I don't see how we can, either,"
Melanie said. "But what else can we
do? You know what will happen if we
try to keep them out. We can try to play
it, anyway. Then, if they're just too
awful, I guess we'll have to give the
whole thing up."
It was a terrible thought. For a few
minutes the two girls contemplated the
possibility in mournful silence. At last,
in a more cheerful voice, Melanie said,
"Well, at least we don't have to give it
up yet, thanks to Elizabeth. If she hadn't
had that idea, I'll bet those jerks would
have finked on us right away, just for the
fun of it."
"Yeah," April said wonderingly.
"How about that Elizabeth! How'd a
little kid like that know how to handle
those two creeps? I'm pretty good at
handling adults and people like that, but
boys! Yick!"
Melanie grinned. "You know? It's
sort of like what you do in ‘nonviolence.'
My mom says it's appealing to
their better natures."
"Better natures, phooey!" April said,
wrinkling up her nose.
Moods and Maybes
THE NEXT DAY AT RECESS TOBY ALVILLAR
SIDLED UP to Melanie and April. Before
he started talking, he looked around
quickly to be sure no one who mattered
was looking. Ken and Toby didn't
believe in talking to girls. Of course, it
was all right to make comments at girls
—particularly if they were insults—but
real conversations were out, at least in
public places.
"When are you guys going ‘you know
where' again?" he asked, sort of out of
the corner of his mouth.
"I don't know," Melanie answered.
"We're not supposed to go there at all,
yet. They're still not letting us play
outside because of the murder and
everything. But my folks are weakening,
I think."
"Caroline says I can start playing
outside again as soon as Melanie can,"
April said.
"Well, look. Ken and I won't go there
until Friday," Toby said. "Try to get your
folks to spring you by then. Okay?"
April and Melanie exchanged
surprised glances. "Oh, we're not just
being boy-scouty," Toby said. "My dad
got mad at me and restricted me for three
days. So I couldn't go before anyway."
April and Melanie tried not to giggle.
"Yeah," Toby said. "It's all you guys'
fault, too. My dad got mad at the way
you guys mashed up my costume.
Parents!" Toby rolled up his eyes in an
exasperated expression. "All I ask him
for is an idea for a Halloween costume.
At first he says he's too busy to think
about it. He's an artist, and he can't
even think up a little old costume idea.
Then, all of a sudden he gets this
brainstorm and he spends a whole day
making the costume, plus a couple of
hours putting me into it, and then he's so
hung up on the whole thing that he gets
mad when I squash it a little."
April and Melanie broke down and
giggled and, sure enough, Toby was
encouraged. "Yeah," he said, "I just
walk in the door, see, and my dad gives
me this cold look and says, ‘How many
were killed?' I start saying what's he
talking about, and he says in this icy
voice, ‘Well, obviously you've been hit
by a truck and I was just wondering
about the other casualties.' After that he
got louder and not so funny—and it ends
up I'm restricted for three days."
Toby mugged an exaggeratedly
exasperated look again and strolled off,
leaving the girls absolutely devastated
with giggles. It was all very well having
a rule about not laughing at Toby, but it
wasn't always easy to stick to it.
That night at home Melanie brought
up the subject of playing outdoors and
got her parents started on an argument
about it. Her father's opinion was that
"we can't keep them cooped up
forever," and fortunately he won—on the
condition that Marshall and Melanie
promise not to play alone. So it all had
to wait until the Rosses could get around
to talking with Mrs. Hall and Mrs.
Chung and get everything all decided—
and by then it was already Thursday.
On Thursday afternoon the three girls
picked up Marshall at his nursery school
and hurried to Egypt. They had just one
day to spend there in peace and quiet
before the coming of the "outsiders." It
was a nice sunny afternoon and
everything was right where they'd left it,
but somehow it was hard to keep their
minds on the Game. They were all
worrying about the next day. They were
wondering if the boys really wanted to
play, or if they just wanted to tease and
make trouble. April said it wouldn't
surprise her a bit if they showed up with
half the boys in the sixth grade and just
smashed everything to pieces. In fact,
April said she thought they might just as
well give the whole thing up and go
away and never come back.
Later Elizabeth, with worried
wrinkles in her forehead, asked Melanie
if April really meant it. Were they really
going to give up the Egypt Game? But
Melanie told her not to worry. "She
doesn't mean it," Melanie said. "She's
just in a bad mood about something.
Can't you tell?"
And April was in a bad mood. She
had been in a bad mood since the day
before, when she'd gotten a letter from
Hollywood. The letter was from
Dorothea, and it was very cheery and
chatty—and it said that Dorothea and
Nick had gotten married. Dorothea
chatted about how happy she and Nick
were, and how she'd moved into Nick's
apartment and there really wasn't much
room. "Of course," the letter said,
"we're both looking forward just
awfully to the time when we can get
more settled and have a bigger place and
have you come to live with us. But in the
meantime, darling, I'm sending the rest
of your things on up to Caroline's as the
storage situation here is just terrible."
There was a lot more about the big
part that Dorothea was about to get—not
the same one as she'd written about last
time, which hadn't really been her type
of thing, anyway. But this new part—
April hadn't finished the letter. She
had torn it up into little tiny pieces and
flushed it down the toilet, so she
couldn't change her mind and paste it
back together. Then she sat on the
windowsill and stared off up Orchard
Avenue. She had still been sitting there
when Caroline came in, but April hadn't
turned around.
"I got a letter from your mother today,
too, dear," Caroline had said. She put
one hand very gently on April's
shoulder.
Hot tears had drowned April's eyes
and painful gulps climbed up her throat.
She had hated the hand on her shoulder
and she had hated Caroline because it
was all her fault. She'd been all right
until Caroline came in—just angry. Mad
—mad—mad, but all right. And then
Caroline had to come in and make her
cry.
Caroline had just stood there, and
once or twice she had made a little
sound in her throat as if she were going
to say something, but she never did.
After a while the painful gulps wore
themselves out and the tears running
down April's cheeks began to feel
almost good, soothing like warm rain.
Suddenly she had felt empty and very
tired, and because she was so tired she
let her head lean over towards Caroline
just a little bit—not really touching, but
almost. They stayed that way for quite a
while and then Caroline had given
April's shoulder a squeeze, kissed her
quickly on top of the head and gone out.
April had sat there a while longer,
tasting the tears on her face with the tip
of her tongue and thinking how long it
had been since she'd cried enough to
taste. And thinking, too, that a kiss on top
of the head was okay, and didn't make
you want to rub it off the way a kiss on
the cheek did. Things were better after
that but April had gone on being in a bad
mood.
Melanie didn't know about the letter,
but she knew something was wrong, and
she was worried. Friday afternoon was
going to be difficult enough without
April's being in one of her touchy
moods. But by Friday, April was in a
much better frame of mind. Melanie
could tell that she had gotten her mind
off whatever it had been that was
bothering her because she started making
cheerful plans in school about getting the
best of Ken and Toby.
That afternoon the girls and Marshall
got to the storage yard first, and they
were all sitting on the edge of the temple
floor just waiting when Ken and Toby
arrived. Ken had to do a certain amount
of squeezing and inhaling to get through
the fence, but skinny Toby came through
almost as easily as the girls, now that he
wasn't wearing boxes. They didn't say
much at first, just "Hi," and then the boys
started looking around at the altars and
the things on them. The girls watched
warily, trying to figure out just what they
had in mind.
After a few minutes Melanie decided
that Ken really didn't have anything in
mind at all. He looked reluctant and
puzzled and a little bit embarrassed. She
decided that Ken was only there because
Toby was, so she started watching Toby.
It was easy to tell by looking at
Toby's dark eyes that something
important was going on behind them.
They almost gave you the feeling that
you could hear things inside his head
going "whirr-clank-buzz," but for once it
didn't seem to have anything to do with
laughter. Melanie began to get the feeling
that maybe Toby wasn't just there to
tease and cut up after all.
So when Toby started asking
questions about the things on the altars
and about Set and Isis, Melanie started
giving straight answers. At first April
poked her and frowned in a way that
said not to give everything away, but
after a while she changed her mind and
started answering questions, too. She
even took the secret scrolls out of their
hiding place in the hollow base of the
statue of Diana and showed the boys the
list of things to do for different
ceremonies and the partly finished
hieroglyphic alphabet. Finally Toby left
the shed and walked to the middle of the
yard.
Ken looked relieved. "Well, I guess
that's all there is to see," he said to
Toby. "We might as well split, huh?
We'll still have time to get in the game
up at school."
But Toby shook his head. "I don't feel
like playing basketball," he said.
"Besides, I sort of go for this Egypt stuff.
Let's hang around awhile. Okay?"
Ken shrugged. "Sheesh!" he said. "I
don't care. But the whole scene's pretty
kooky, if you ask me."
It turned out that Toby wasn't kidding
—he really did go for the Egypt Game.
He wanted to hear and see everything,
and that first afternoon he somehow
managed to talk the girl Egyptians into
doing all their ceremonies and rituals
over for him to watch. At first they were
still a little suspicious and embarrassed,
but when it became clear that he wasn't
going to tease they became more
enthusiastic. A couple of times he even
made approving comments like, "Hey!
Weird!" or, "Holy cow."
Ken was pretty respectful about the
whole thing, too. He kept hitting himself
on the forehead and saying "Sheesh!" but
his tone of voice seemed to indicate
amazement more than anything else.
As they were all leaving, a little
before 5:30, Toby asked the girls to
write down the names of some of the
best books about Egypt. He said he was
going to the library that evening to check
some out.
That night April and Melanie sat on
Melanie's bed and, feeling very pleased
with things in general, they discussed the
future. The first meeting of the enlarged
Egypt gang had gone off much more
smoothly than they had expected. They
didn't admit it, even to each other, but
they had both been flattered by Ken's
and Toby's respectful interest.
"And maybe, after a week or two,
they'll lose interest," Melanie said.
"Maybe they'll play for a while and then
they'll get homesick for their old ball
games, and everything will be just like it
used to be."
"Yeah," April agreed. "I'll bet they
do. Or else, maybe they won't even
come back at all. Maybe they were just
curious, and now that they know all
about it, they just might not bother to
come back. And I don't think they're
going to fink to the other kids, either. At
least, not as long as they don't get mad at
us, or something. You know, I wouldn't
be surprised if they just don't show up
tomorrow at all."
Hieroglyphics
KEN AND TOBY SHOWED UP IN EGYPT THE
NEXT DAY, all right. They showed up
right on time, overflowing with ideas
and loaded down with stuff. At least,
Toby was overflowing with ideas, and
Ken was carrying most of the stuff.
The four original Egyptians were
especially thrilled and amazed about the
stuff the boys brought for Set. It seemed
that sixth-grade boys just normally kept a
lot of things around that were perfect for
the altar of an evil god. Set's altar,
which had always been rather bare in
comparison to Isis's jeweled and
flowered throne, was suddenly rich with
ornaments. There were several lifelike
rubber things—spiders, snakes and bugs.
There was a real skull of a mediumsize
animal, maybe a cat or a skunk, and a
well preserved dead tarantula. There
was a wicked-looking theatrical dagger,
with a twisted blade that sank into the
handle to make fake stabbings look real.
But the two best things were a shrunken
head and a large stuffed owl.
The shrunken head wasn't real, of
course, but it was an expensive rubber
one that did look terribly real. It was
Ken's, and he was obviously quite
pleased with himself for bringing it. The
owl was Toby's and it was real; that is,
it had been once, but now it was stuffed.
It was a little beat-up-looking, but Toby
said that was because he'd had it ever
since he was a baby. Actually, what he
said was that his father had given it to
him to cut his teeth on when he was five
months old, but that might only have
been one of Toby's stories.
Anyway, it looked great perched on a
little shelf just above the altar of the evil
god. It sat there, in the shadows among
the spiderwebs, and peered down
balefully over its tooth-scarred beak. At
first Toby suggested that it could be a
servant of Set, whose duty was to carry
the message of doom to Set's victims;
but later on someone remembered Thoth,
the bird-headed god of wisdom and
writing. From then on the owl was
known as Thoth.
Besides all the other stuff, Toby had
also brought some pencils and paper. He
said he'd been thinking it over, and he'd
decided the first thing they ought to do
was finish the alphabet of hieroglyphics
the girls had started.
"Oh, is that right," April said. "Is that
what you've decided? Whose Egypt
Game do you think this is, anyway? Just
because—"
She had a lot more things to say, but
Toby interrupted. "Okay, okay. Cool it
for a minute and let me finish. Let me tell
you the rest of my idea before you start
coming unglued. Then if you don't buy it
—" he shrugged—"we won't do it."
That seemed fair enough, so April
shut up, but she kept her eyes narrowed
warily as Toby explained. When they
had the alphabet all made up, they could
memorize it and use it to write secret
messages—at school and everyplace.
They could write about things like when
to meet in Egypt again, and what they
thought of the teacher, and all sorts of
other private information. Then if the
messages fell into enemy hands, no one
would know what it was all about.
Besides that, Toby thought they should
each choose an Egyptian name—
Marshall was already Marshamosis—
and a hieroglyphic symbol that stood for
the name. That way each one could sign
his messages with his symbol and that
would make the whole thing more
mysterious. Toby took out a piece of
paper all folded up into a tiny square
and spread it out on the floor of the shed.
On it were some hieroglyphics and some
Egyptian names that he had copied out of
books the night before. Everyone except
April immediately got down on hands
and knees and began to examine the
paper eagerly and discuss possible
names.
April was telling herself it was a
crummy idea, when all of a sudden she
remembered Bastet. Bastet had always
seemed especially intriguing to April.
She was a sort of cat goddess, and there
was a famous statue of her as a cat, with
cruel mysterious eyes and earrings in her
ears. If you were to pick the name of
Bastet, your symbol could be a cat's
head with earrings. "Hey," she said,
dropping down to join the group, "I've
got a great one."
Everybody liked April's name and
hieroglyph. In fact, Toby said it gave him
an idea for a hieroglyph for himself.
He'd already picked out his name. It was
going to be Ramose, after a famous
Egyptian wise man. And since an owl
was supposed to be wise, what could be
better than an owl's head for a symbol?
Melanie knew right away what she
wanted her name to be. She had gone
once with her parents to hear Grace
Bumbry sing Aïda and had been
fascinated with the tragic story of the
beautiful princess who had been a
captive in ancient Egypt. As a matter of
fact, she'd already thought of herself as
Aïda, at times, when they were playing
the Egypt Game, but she hadn't told
anyone. A symbol to go with Aïda was a
bit of a problem, but finally Melanie
picked the bird hieroglyph because it
stood for the letter A in the real Egyptian
alphabet.

When everyone was through
choosing, Melanie made a new scroll
and added it to the secret records.
Ken had picked the name of
Horemheb because Toby said Horemheb
had been a great general and also a
pharaoh. He thought up his own
hieroglyph of a bloody sword. There
wasn't anything particularly Egyptian
about it, but it did seem to go with being
a general. Elizabeth's symbol was
April's idea. It was a real Egyptian
hieroglyph and it meant "heart," to go
with Nefertiti, which means "Beloved
One." And of course Marshall's
hieroglyph was the double crown of
Egypt because he was already the boypharaoh—and
that's what he liked to be
best.
The next few meetings of the
Egyptians were taken up with finishing
the hieroglyphic alphabet and
memorizing it. Some of the letters that
they used in their alphabet were actual
Egyptian hieroglyphs, but for the sounds
that were missing in the Egyptian
alphabet, as well as a few that were too
difficult to draw in their original form,
they made up their own. Then, because
their book on Egyptian writing told how
hieroglyphics were considered magical
works of art as well as writing, and
because they were always done in many
bright colors, it was decided that some
sets of colored pens were necessary. So
the game was suspended for a couple of
afternoons while money was raised to
buy the pens. Ken and Toby mowed a
few lawns, and the girls and Marshall
scouted the neighborhood for empty
bottles to return to the grocery store.
Just buying the pens took most of
another afternoon because it took so long
to get waited on at Schmitt's Variety
Store. Melanie said her mother said that
the reason Mr. Schmitt never had a clerk
for long was that he paid such low
salaries. Except for Mr. Schmitt's
cousin, a stocky redheaded young man
with blotchy freckles, there was no one
working in the store that day but Mr.
Schmitt. The cousin never waited on
customers, but only dusted shelves and
brought stuff out from the back room; and
Mr. Schmitt, himself, never waited on
kids until after all the grown-ups were
taken care of, no matter who'd been
there longest. So the Egypt gang waited
and waited and it was all pretty
frustrating.
But the pens were worth the effort,
and during the next few days Egypt was
full of scribes practicing the ancient art
of hieroglyphic writing. In a short time
all sorts of possibilities were suggested
and explored. Letters were written and
exchanged and deciphered. Decorative
hieroglyphic borders were added to the
poster-paint pictures that already
adorned the walls of the temple. Secret
mailing spots were picked out all around
the neighborhood, such as a certain
clump of weeds in an untended parkway
or the crotch of a particular plum tree. A
mysterious and beautifully drawn page
of hieroglyphics got loose in the sixthgrade
class at Wilson School and was
passed around and puzzled over by
everyone, including the teacher; but no
one came even close to figuring it out.
And of course, no one was as loudly and
dramatically puzzled as the four sixthgrade
members of the Egypt Game.
Later, there was a brief and bloodless
war, a sort of battle of the scribes, when
Ramose and Bastet started an argument
over whether a line of hieroglyphics
should be written from left to right or
from up to down. Everybody took sides
and went home mad; and for a day or
two Toby and Ken went back to playing
basketball after school.
It turned out to be a good thing really,
because they were just in time to find out
about a plot. Some of the other boys had
gotten so curious about what Ken and
Toby had found to do after school that
was better than basketball, that they
were getting ready to launch an
investigation.
Toby took care of that in a hurry.
Without exactly saying so, he managed to
spread the rumor that he and Ken had an
after-school job—a very serious job
involving actual work. Toby figured that
there was nothing less interesting to most
of the kids he knew than an after-school
job, and he was right. After that the other
boys weren't nearly so curious.
Then when a few days had passed
and all the Egyptians had had a chance to
cool off, Ken and Toby turned up in
Egypt again—and the others were glad
to see them. It did seem best not to talk
about hieroglyphics right away—but that
was all right because everyone was a
little tired of them anyhow—particularly
Marshall.
It wasn't that Marshall hadn't taken
any interest in hieroglyphic writing,
because he had. As a matter of fact, he
could almost do a better job of reading
and writing in Egyptian than he could in
English. But, since he wasn't even in
kindergarten yet, he wasn't exactly fluent
in either one. So towards the end of the
hieroglyphic period, when he'd learned
about as much Egyptian writing as he felt
ready for, he hadn't had very much to do.
Most of the time he spent just watching.
He had watched the other Egyptians
writing and planning and arguing, he had
watched an ant hole in the corner of the
storage yard, and every once in a while
he had watched the little window in one
of the walls of the land of Egypt.
Then, one day not long after Ken and
Toby returned to the land of Egypt, a
neighbor's cat got into the Chungs'
apartment and killed Petey the parakeet
—the only pet Elizabeth had ever
owned. Elizabeth was brokenhearted,
and it was while they were trying to
cheer her up that April and Melanie got
the idea for the Ceremony for the Dead.
The Ceremony for the
Dead
IT WAS SATURDAY AFTERNOON AND
APRIL, MELANIE and Marshall had just
come down to get Elizabeth to join the
boys in Egypt for a previously scheduled
rendezvous. When Elizabeth met them at
the door with her dead pet, and tears in
her eyes, it was only natural that
somebody should think of a funeral. And
when April and Melanie started tossing
the idea back and forth, decorating and
elaborating the way they always did, it
worked just the way it was supposed to.
Elizabeth's tears slowed up, and a damp
dimple flickered in her cheek.
By the time the three girls and
Marshall squeezed through the fence to
Egypt, where Ken and Toby were
already waiting, a great deal of the
necessary background material was
already beginning to take shape. Prince
Pete-ho-tep, son of the great Queen
Neferbeth, had just fallen in a battle with
a terrible monster, and his body was
being taken in solemn procession to the
temple of Anubis, God of the Dead.
Ken and Toby were gratifyingly
enthusiastic. In fact, Toby, who always
had to be right in the middle of
everything, insisted right away that he
and Ken—Horemheb, that is—were
going to be the high priests of Anubis.
"Now, just a minute," April said.
"Melanie and I thought up this ceremony.
We get to be the high priestesses of the
dead."
"You mean Aïda—you and Aïda,"
Toby corrected. Just the day before a
rule had been passed that members
should be called only by their Egyptian
names while they were inside the land of
Egypt.
"Okay! Me and Aïda. Anyway it was
our idea."
"Yeah, but I've just finished reading a
great book that tells all about what they
did to the mummies and everything. I've
got some tough ideas."
"So have I," April said.
"Queen Neferbeth ought to choose the
high priest," Melanie said, interrupting
the exchange of glares. "After all, it's
her parakeet."
That broke the deadlock. Elizabeth
didn't want to decide against anybody,
so she put a pebble in one hand and let
them choose. Ken and Toby won and got
to be the high priests of Anubis.
The first thing Toby did as high priest
was to announce that the whole thing
was going to take a long time. In real
Egyptian times, he said, the preparation
of the dead and the funeral ceremony
took as much as forty days. Theirs
wouldn't take that long, but maybe it
would last as much as five or six. He
said that before he could really get
started, they were going to need a lot of
supplies, so until he could get the things
he neelded they might just as well go on
with the procession to the temple.
Melanie suggested that the procession
needed palm branches and flower petals
and that sort of thing; and of course
everyone thought of the trash bin behind
the florist shop. So, a few minutes later,
the entire population of Egypt was
sneaking up the alley on the way to sort
over the florist's recent rejects. As soon
as they returned, loaded with loot, the
procession got under way.
Marshall came first, carrying the
smoking incense burner. Next came
Elizabeth, as the Queen Mother and
Chief Mourner. One of the curtain robes
was draped over her head as a veil and
she carried a big bouquet of only slightly
wilted dahlias. Then came April and
Melanie as the mourning populace,
scattering flowers and chanting, "Weep
for Prince Pete-ho-tep—fallen in battle,"
in a high mournful wail. And last of all
came the two high priests of Anubis,
carrying on a flower-strewn plank the
dead body of Prince Pete-ho-tep.
The procession wound its way back
and forth across the storage yard several
times, and came to a stop in the temple.
There the bier was placed on a specially
prepared altar in the middle of the floor.
At that point the ceremony had to stop
for fresh ideas. Since this was the first
Ceremony for the Dead there was no
record scroll to follow, and it was
necessary to stop now and then for
discussion and new suggestions.
Afterwards, of course, Melanie would
make a record of the things that were
done—and any future Ceremony for the
Dead wouldn't have to stop and start.
All the other ceremonies and rites
had been developed in the same way, but
this time there was a difference. This
was the first new ceremony to be made
up since the coming of the two new
Egyptians, and the first real ceremony
they'd actually taken part in. April and
Melanie had often wondered if they ever
really would.
But they needn't have wondered. The
boys took part, all right, and to an extent
that nobody had expected. For instance,
it was Toby who suggested that they
march around the altar, beating their
chests and sprinkling their heads with
ashes and wailing. That wasn't so much
of a surprise. He'd already demonstrated
that he had lots of good ideas. It was the
way he threw himself into the part that
came as a shock to the girls. He was so
different from what he was at school. At
school he was Toby the cool-cat
sophisticate; and now, suddenly, he was
Toby, the grief-stricken ancient Egyptian.
And, somehow, he gave the feeling there
were a lot of other roles he could play
just as well.
Ken was a different matter, although
he, too, did a lot better than anybody
would have expected. He was, of
course, absolutely perfect at being
himself, and he was very much at home
in the role. But this Egyptian business
was something else again.
And so, while Toby staggered around
the altar, beating his chest with wildeyed
abandon, sprinkling real ashes—
left over from Set's sacrificial fire—in
his hair, and wailing like a wounded
electric guitar; and while, right behind
him, April and Melanie did more or less
the same things, just about as
realistically, except they were using
imaginary ashes—because to a girl even
the death of a pharaoh isn't worth a dirty
head; and while Elizabeth did everything
April and Melanie did, only softer; and
while even Marshall marched with
solemn assurance, thumping his chest
firmly with the hand that wasn't holding
Security, and making a noise like a stuck
recording, Ken brought up the rear.
If the rest of them could do it, Ken
Kamata could, too, and he did. But it
wasn't easy. Every time he thumped his
chest or made a brief, halfhearted wail,
he felt his ears get hot; and from time to
time he announced to nobody in
particular, "Sheesh! I feel like a kook."
When 5:30 came and everyone was
leaving, Toby told the other members of
the Egypt Game to call him up that
evening and he would assign them
something to bring. He was going to do
some research, he said, to find out
exactly what was needed to make a
mummy. But there was an awful lot to
learn about mummies, and even after a
whole evening of study it turned out that
Toby's information wasn't all that
complete. For instance, when Ken, who
was assigned to bring oil, wanted to
know what kind, Toby couldn't exactly
say. It didn't seem likely that the ancient
Egyptians used any of the kinds Ken and
Toby knew about—crankcase, sewing
machine, polyunsaturated or bicycle.
They finally settled for bicycle, because
oil was oil, and bicycle was the only
kind that Ken owned personally.
When the Egyptians had assembled
the next after noon, bringing their
offerings of oil and spice and salt and
perfume, Toby—Ramose—gave a little
talk on how to prepare a mummy. It was
a good speech, but it suffered from
frequent interruptions because Bastet
and Aïda had read the same book and
had some ideas of their own. And there
was another pause while everyone tried
to comfort Queen Neferbeth, who got all
upset when Ramose spoke indelicately
about "taking out the guts." It turned out
that Queen Neferbeth felt so strongly
about "cutting holes in Petey," even if he
was dead, that it was decided to
dispense with that part of the procedure.
"It'll be all right, Tobe—uh—
Ramose," Horemheb said. "He's so little
he can't have enough guts to make that
much difference."
Toby was disappointed, but he had to
admit that according to the book there
was another way. Poor people, who
couldn't afford the more expensive
process, had been simply soaked in
brine.
So the rest of the afternoon was taken
up in preparing a saltwater bath for
Prince Pete-ho-tep and placing him in it
with the proper pomp. Then he was left
to soak.
The appearance of the mummy-to-be
when he was removed from his brine
bath, on the following afternoon, was
something of a shock to everybody. His
wet feathers stuck to his tiny body and he
was covered with a thick white salty
scum. When Toby lifted him gingerly out
of the brine by one claw, everybody felt
a little queasy, and Elizabeth's eyes
became suspiciously liquid.
Toby glanced at her and sighed
impatiently. "Now just cool it a minute,
Neferbeth," he said. "I'll have him all
fixed up in two seconds." He hastily
poured some fresh water over the
parakeet and dried him off on the tail of
his T-shirt, which was huge and dingy
and probably belonged to his father.
When Pete-ho-tep was dry and his
feathers rearranged, he did look almost
as good as new, and the mummification
process continued. In the next few days
he was anointed with spices and
perfume, wrapped in thin strips of oilsoaked
cloth, and laid to rest with a
supply of birdseed and a few of his
favorite toys, in a smallish pyramid
made of old bricks.
It was a good week in the land of
Egypt. Melanie collected several new
ceremonies to add to the sacred records;
Ken began to find being an ancient
Egyptian a little less embarrassing; and
Elizabeth felt so proud of the important
part that Petey had played, she almost
forgot how much she missed him.
But as the Egypt Game became
second nature to its six participants, and
they began to feel more and more at
home in the land of Egypt, they gradually
began to forget about being cautious.
Ceremonies, discussions and arguments
began to be carried on in normal or even
louder than normal tones and no one
stopped to worry about being overheard.
Only one very small Egyptian had an
idea that the land of Egypt was being
watched, and for some reason, which
was his own and private, he didn't
choose to tell.
The Oracle of Thoth
STRANGE AS IT MAY SEEM, MRS.
GRANGER, THE sixth-grade teacher at
Wilson, was responsible for the next
phase of the Egypt Game. It all grew out
of the fact that an assignment the class
was reading just barely mentioned
something called an oracle. Toby had a
pretty good idea of what an oracle was
but he decided to ask Mrs. Granger
about it, in the hopes of getting her
started on one of her long-winded
explanations. A test was scheduled for
the end of the period, and Mrs. Granger
had been known to forget about such
things, if you handled it just right.
So Toby asked a question about
oracles and sure enough it worked. He'd
picked on a subject that Mrs. Granger
could really get her teeth into. She got
that gleam in her eye and started out full
blast, and Toby settled back, feeling sure
she was good for the rest of the time
until recess.
But the way it turned out, the whole
thing sort of backfired, because by the
end of the period the whole class—Toby
included—was as hung up on the whole
oracle bit as Mrs. Granger was. As a
matter of fact, it had completely slipped
Toby's mind that he'd only asked about it
to head off a test. Mrs. Granger could do
that sort of thing to you, if you weren't
careful.
During library period, which came
next, a lot of people got stuff to read
about oracles, and that afternoon there
was another discussion in class.
Everyone had come up with a lot of info
about the different kinds of oracles and
how they predicted the future in different
ways—through the actions of sacred
snakes or birds or fish or even through
the way the insides of a dead animal
were arranged when the priests cut it
open. There was even one very famous
one that was run by a priestess who went
into a kind of trance or fit, and while she
was clear off in this trance she spouted
out a lot of messages and stuff that were
supposed to come right straight from the
mouths of the gods. The oracles all had
special sacred places, caves or grottoes
or specially built temples, and there
were all sorts of far-out things connected
with them like sacred fires and mystic
vapors and magical statues.
Among the stuff reported to the class
was a list of the countries that had
depended on oracles to help the rulers
decide how to run things. And one of the
countries was Egypt.
As soon as he heard it, Toby
remembered reading something about the
Egyptian priests making predictions, but
he just hadn't been thinking about the
oracles in connection with the Egypt
Game until that moment. He snuck a
glance in the direction of Ross and
February, to see if they had the same
idea, and sure enough, they had. It was
easy to tell. They were staring at each
other in that way they had. If they were
where they could talk, Toby thought to
himself, one of them would be starting a
sentence and the other finishing it—as if
they had Siamese brains, or something.
Just at that moment the girls stopped
staring at each other and turned and
stared at Toby.
They were giving him that same bit
with the eyes that they used on each
other; and if he'd wanted to, Toby could
have given it right back. He knew what
they were saying, all right. Instead, he
slowly and deliberately made his eyes
go crossed and let his mouth fall open in
a "stupid-idiot" face.
The reaction was just what he'd
expected. The girls looked shocked, then
angry, and then they turned their backs
and worked hard at ignoring him for the
rest of the period. Toby let his mind go
back to his plans for the afternoon with a
feeling of satisfaction. They would have
forgotten about being mad by the time
school was out—and besides, they'd
really asked for it. He'd told those girls
before, Egypt was Egypt, but at school
you had to play it cool.
That afternoon's two hours in Egypt
turned out to be mostly a long discussion
of the What and How of the Egyptian
Oracle. April had her mind set on the
kind of oracle that got its messages from
the gods through a high priestess with
fits. And, naturally, she was all set to be
the high priestess. She would sit on a
throne before the sacred fire, surrounded
by swirling mystic vapors, and people
who wanted predictions would write
their question on a slip of paper and
drop it in the fire. She would go into a
trance, and then she would speak with
the voice of the gods.
That was just great as far as the
trance was concerned, Toby thought. If
anybody could throw a far-out fit, April
could. And if he hadn't cooked up such a
great idea himself, he'd have been
tempted to go along with April's version
just to see how she'd do it. But the fact
of the matter was, he had a scheme that
was going to make the oracle bit just
about the greatest thing that had ever hit
the land of Egypt. So, much as he hated
to do it, he set about spoiling April's
plans.
"So, when they drop their questions
in the fire," he asked, "how are you
going to know what to answer?
Particularly if you haven't even seen the
question?"
"You must not have been listening in
class today," April said. "I don't have to
know. The gods speak through the mouth
of the priestess." Sometimes it was hard
to tell whether April was kidding or
whether she really believed stuff like
that.
Ken was looking at April in
consternation. "You really think the gods
are . . . " His voice faded away and for a
minute he just stared at April. "Sheesh!"
he said at last. "You really are cracking
up this time."
But Toby only raised an eyebrow and
gave April his cool-amusement look.
"Sure," he said, "but don't you think we
ought to have something else planned?
Just in case the gods don't get the
message."
Then, while April glared at him, Toby
told everybody his idea, and naturally
everybody thought it was the greatest.
Even April, after she'd had a chance to
cool off. The way Toby saw it,
somebody would think up a question
they wanted answered about the future.
Then they would write it on a piece of
paper and bring the paper to the temple
of the oracle. At the temple the priest—
or priestess, he added graciously—
would pass the paper over the sacred
fire, and do whatever other stuff he
could think up. Then—and this was the
good part—he would take it to this
special altar they would build for Thoth
and put the question in his beak and
leave it there overnight.
Toby jumped up and grabbed Thoth
down off the shelf and dusted him off.
"After all," Toby said, "Thoth was the
Egyptian god of wisdom, and this crazy
priestess bit was something the Greeks
thought up."
That was a good point, and after that
there wasn't much more argument—
except that April did say if they were
going to be so particular, how about the
fact that actually Thoth was supposed to
be an ibis and not an old chewed-up
owl. But nobody paid much attention to
her. They were all too busy starting in on
Thoth's altar and planning the ceremony
for Consulting the Oracle.
It was decided that they would draw
straws and the winner would get to be
the first one to ask the oracle a question.
They gave the straws to Marshall to hold
and everybody drew. And, just as you'd
think, the winner was Ken, the one guy
who really didn't want to win.
"Sheesh," Ken said. "I don't know
anything to ask. Anything I can't find out
for myself, I don't even want to know."
"Now look," Toby said. "You won
and you can't cop out on it. That's poor
sportsmanship. Anybody can think of a
little old question about the future. I'll
bet even Marshall could think up a lot of
questions, and he's only four years old."
"I can think up three bags full,"
Marshall said.
Nobody ever got away with calling
Ken a poor sportsman. His chin got the
hard look it got just before he slammed a
home run, and after a minute you could
tell he'd thought of something because
his ears got red. "Okay," he said, "I got a
question. Give me the paper."
At that point, Melanie suggested that
perhaps the questions to the oracle ought
to be written in hieroglyphics, but for
some reason Toby was against it. As
soon as Ken had written his question,
Toby grabbed the folded paper, and,
stepping up to the new altar, he started
right in being the priest of the oracle. By
the time a certain party realized what
had happened, she was too interested in
what was going on to argue.
Toby pressed the slip of paper to his
forehead and walked three times around
the temple. Then he made Ken kneel
before the altar of Thoth and press the
paper to Thoth's forehead, while Toby
sprinkled them both with holy water
from the tuna can. Next he hung the paper
on one of Thoth's long sharp toenails
and sprinkled it with more holy water.
Finally he waved it back and forth in the
smoke from the incense burner, chanting,
"Hear us, O Thoth, ancient and wise.
Hear us and answer."
There was no doubt about it, Toby
made a great high priest. The other
Egyptians were so caught up in his
smooth solemnity and exalted priestly
expression that they found themselves
almost believing—well, half-believing
—that Toby was actually talking to an
ancient and powerful being, and that
something strange and supernatural was
about to happen. So, when Toby turned
to them a moment later and thundered,
"Kneel and bow low—O ancient
Egyptians—before the miracle of the
oracle!" they hurried to obey.
A moment later, when they lifted their
foreheads from the temple floor, the
scrap of paper was hanging in Thoth's
curved beak, and Toby was backing
away from the altar, bowing at every
step.
When Toby had backed to where the
others were kneeling, he got them up and
hustled them out of the temple. Out in the
middle of the storage yard, he dropped
his high-priest expression. In his normal
voice he said, "Well, I guess we might
as well cut out. If we hang around,
somebody's going to read what's on
Ken's question before tomorrow and that
would ruin everything."
April's eyes flattened. "Like what for
instance?" she asked. "Just what do you
have in mind that might get ruined, Mr.
Oracle?"
"Have in mind?" Toby said, giving
her the wide-eyed-innocence treatment.
"I don't have anything in mind. It's just
that I don't want anybody else to either.
At least, not until we find out what the
oracle can do all by itself."
"Wait a minute, Tobe!" Ken said,
looking worried again. "You don't mean
you think there's a chance it might? How
about what you said before—about the
gods not getting the message and all that?
Sheesh! Sometimes I think the whole
bunch of you guys are going off your
rockers."
Toby gave Ken a reassuring grin.
"Cool it," he said. "I don't think
anything. At least not anything for sure. I
just think we ought to give it a chance.
Then if nothing happens, we can take
turns being the one who makes up the
answers. But what I do think is, you
never can tell about a thing like this." He
lowered his voice mysteriously. "After
all, it used to work, didn't it? I mean all
those other oracles weren't just kid stuff.
Even kings and generals and all sorts of
other adults used to go for this oracle
stuff, didn't they? Well—"
As one person, the six Egyptians
turned and looked back into the templeshed.
The sun was very low and the
shade was deep in the back of the temple
where the new altar to Thoth had been
built. The huge tattered owl seemed to
be leaning forward, staring into the
incense burner; and as they watched, a
final twist of fragrant smoke curled
upward like a dancing snake and seemed
to wind itself around the head of Thoth.
Someone moved towards the opening
in the fence, and the other five followed
so quickly that it was almost as if
nobody much wanted to be the last one
out into the alley.
The Oracle Speaks
THE NEXT DAY, BY PREARRANGEMENT, ALL
THE Egyptians met in the alley and
entered the land of Egypt together. Toby
said that was necessary so no one would
have a chance to fool around with the
oracle before everyone was there. Once
inside the yard, everyone looked at
Toby, but Toby looked at April.
"Okay, Bastet," he said, "you wanted
to be the oracle priestess, so today it's
your turn. You can do the Ceremony of
Returning to the Oracle for the Answer.
That is, unless you don't think you can
think up a good answer."
"I can think of answers to anything,"
April said. "But I thought you were
expecting the oracle to do its own
answers. Or did you change your mind?"
"Oh no," Toby said. "I didn't change
my mind. I just thought you ought to have
some good answers ready, just in case.
So, let's get going."
So April took charge. To get
everyone in the mood, she got the box of
costumes out of the shed and had
everyone put something on, a headdress
or a robe or at least some jewelry. Then
she set the scene. "Okay," she said,
"Horemheb, the famous general, has
come on a pilgrimage to the grotto of the
Oracle of Thoth to ask a terribly
important question. He arrived at the
grotto a few days ago and asked his
question, and since then he has been
fasting in a holy cell while he waits for
the answer. You know, people who were
going to the oracle had to prepare
themselves very carefully, so they
usually shut themselves up for days
without any food and meditated until
they felt very pure and sort of dizzy, and
then they were ready to go. So that's
what you've been doing, Ken."
Ken looked self-conscious, and
Melanie made a funny, smothered sound.
April was careful not to catch her eye.
She knew that Melanie was trying not to
laugh at the idea of solid old Ken being
"pure and dizzy." April hurried on.
"The rest of us are priests and
attendants of the Oracle. And I'm the
high priestess who is the only one who
can go into the altar room where the
oracle gives out the answers."
Next, April had everyone help make
some twisted paper logs to burn in the
sacred fire-bowl, and then she lined
them all up for a procession to the
grotto. Ken was in the middle in the
place of honor and April demonstrated
to him how he should walk—with his
hands crossed over his chest and his
eyes sort of rolled up. April herself led
the procession; and when they had gone
twice around the yard, she lined
everyone up on the edge of the temple.
Then she approached the altar alone.
First she lit the candles and the
incense and the sacred fire, and put the
fire-bowl on the floor in front of the
altar. On the altar, Thoth still sat with the
slip of paper in his beak, exactly as
they'd left him the night before. April
bowed low before him and started in on
an elaborate ceremony, using some of the
old things they'd done before and some
new ones she'd just thought up. She
walked around the altar backwards three
times sprinkling holy water. She pulled
out three hairs from her head and
dropped them on the fire. Then she sat
down cross-legged between the fire and
the altar and began to chant. Melanie sat
down, too, on the edge of the temple
floor and motioned for the others to do
the same.
"Aie-ie-ie-ie!" April chanted, making
her voice go up and down the scale; and
along the edge of the temple, the other
Egyptians took it up. When the wailing
chant was going strong, April suddenly
cried, "Stop! The mighty Thoth has
heard us. The oracle has spoken!"
Very slowly and dramatically, with
her eyes half closed and her face
smoothed into a dream-like calmness,
April raised her arms above her head
and with both hands took the message
from the beak of Thoth. Very, very
slowly she brought it down to eye level
and unfolded it. She read it carefully and
then turned it over and read the other
side. Her calmly regal high-priestess
expression faded and she frowned as she
read each side again. Then she stood up
and stomped out of the temple. The rest
of the Egyptians jumped up.

"Okay," April said. "Who's the wise
guy?"
"Wise guy?"
"What's the matter?"
"What does it say?"
Everybody was talking at once.
"What did you write on this paper
yesterday?" April asked Ken. "What
was your question?"
Ken shrugged. "Oh, I don't know," he
said. "Just some dumb stuff about if I
was going to be a star in the big leagues
some day."
April held out the slip of paper and
everybody crowded around to look. In
Ken's large neat handwriting it said:
Will I be a big league star
someday?
"Yeah, that's it," Ken said. "That's
what I wrote."
But then April turned the paper over
so the other side was visible. In a very
different handwriting, small and jittery,
there was written:
Man is his own star, and
that soul who can be honest, is
the only perfect man
"How about that?" April asked. "Did
you write that too?"
"Me?" Ken said in amazement. "No
way! I didn't have time to write all that.
Besides, I don't even know what it
means."
April and Melanie looked at each
other and nodded. It was true—it didn't
sound like anything Ken would do. They
turned to Toby.
"Okay, Toby," April said. "When did
you write this?"
Toby looked disgusted. "Let's not get
ridiculous," he said. "How could I have
written all that without anybody seeing
me?"
"Well, you must have," April said,
"because I know none of the rest of us
did it."
"Oh yeah?" Toby said. "I'll bet you
did it yourself."
From there on the argument began to
get louder and more personal. There
were accusations and
counteraccusations, but no one would
admit to writing the mysterious and
puzzling words that straggled across the
back of Ken's question. It was finally
Melanie who made peace by suggesting
that maybe they should just try the whole
thing again and see what happened,
instead of fighting about it. "We can
watch to see that nobody writes an
answer, and then if we get another
answer and we know none of us wrote
it . . . " Her voice trailed off and nobody
offered to finish the sentence for her. It
was the kind of thought that isn't easily
finished.
It was April who won the straw
drawing this time, and she thought quite
a while before she decided on a
question. After she had written it on a
piece of notebook paper, she showed
everyone the clean clear back of the
paper before she handed it, folded, to
Toby for the Ceremony of Presenting the
Question to the Oracle. Toby presided
again as the high priest, and his
ceremony was almost exactly the same
as the day before.
That is, the things Toby did were just
about the same, but somehow the feeling
was different. Or perhaps, not so much
different as more so. More spooky and
supernatural. Even though all the
Egyptians were positive that somebody
was fooling and had somehow managed
to write the answer to Ken's question,
there are times when being positive isn't
quite enough.
There wasn't much light in the land of
Egypt that afternoon, which didn't make
it all less strange. The days had been
getting shorter, of course, but it was
something more than a gradual seasonal
change. As Toby bowed and mumbled
and chanted before the altar of Thoth, his
high-priest face looking distant and
unfamiliar in the deep shadow and
flickering candlelight, low black clouds
were moving in swiftly from the bay. In
the temple it was suddenly so dark that
the reflected candles lit Thoth's glassy
stare with points of fire.
Then, just as Toby was finishing his
ceremony, there was a huge shuddering
thumping noise that seemed to come
from everywhere at once. Elizabeth gave
a little scream and everyone rushed out
of the temple. It wasn't until a rain-filled
blast of air swept into the land of Egypt
a moment later that the noise was
recognized for what it was.
"Thunder! That was thunder!"
everybody started saying to each other in
voices that were giggly with relief.
Somehow, without quite knowing how
they'd gotten there, they were all six
standing in a rather tight little group in
the center of the storage yard.
"And rain! Wow!" somebody added.
That was the day they found out that it
really was impossible for more than one
person at a time to get through the hole in
the fence, no matter how hard they tried.
Where Is Security?
THE NEXT DAY ALL SIX EGYPTIANS WAITED
WITH great impatience for the end of
school and the time to meet in the land of
Egypt. Everyone was anxious to see if
April's question would be answered, but
two of the Egyptians had a special
reason of their own to be impatient.
Marshall had lost his octopus, Security,
and there was reason to believe that it
had been left in Egypt the night before.
Marshall wanted Security back, and
Melanie wanted Marshall to quit
pestering her and be himself again.
The night before when everyone had
left Egypt in such a hurry they had been
too busy getting away from the rain—
and the darkness and question
mysteriously answered—to remember
about Security. Not even Marshall had
thought of it. And then, just as Marshall
and Melanie got back to their apartment,
their dad had come in early from the
university. He had just been promised a
teaching assistantship for the spring
semester, and he had been in the mood
for a celebration. He had rushed
Marshall and Melanie into the car and
they had driven to the school where their
mom taught, and then they had all gone
out to dinner. It was an exciting and
unusual evening because until Dad got
out of school, money was scarce, and
they didn't eat out very often. In fact, it
had been such an interesting evening that
Marshall hadn't had time to remember
about Security until they were home.
Melanie had been climbing into bed
when Marshall came into her room. The
minute she had looked at him she had
known what was wrong—either Security
was lost, or the world was coming to an
end. It had to be that serious!
Of course, Marshall had wanted to go
out right then to Egypt, and Melanie had
had a hard time convincing him that it
was impossible. It was late, they were
both ready for bed, and outdoors the rain
was coming down in a great wet roar.
Mom and Dad would never let them go
alone, and if Dad went with them, the
other Egyptians would never forgive
them for giving away Egypt to a grownup.
Melanie had known that Marshall
understood the importance of what she
was saying and that he was trying
awfully hard to believe that it was all
more important than finding Security. He
had gone to the window and stood
looking out at the waves of rain that
swooshed against the pane. When he
came back to Melanie's bed his chin
was wiggling. "But—but Security will
drown if I don't go get him," he had
said.
Melanie had taken hold of his
shoulders. "Marshall honey, octopuses
can't drown. They live in water," she
had said.
Marshall had hung his head. And
finally he had sighed and said very
softly, "But Security is another kind of
octopus."
Just then Melanie had thought of
something that helped. "You know what?
I'll bet you didn't leave Security in
Egypt at all. Now that I think about it, I
don't remember seeing him there today.
I'll bet you left him at nursery school.
I'll bet he's safe and sound in the
playroom at nursery school, and you can
get him in the morning when you get to
school."
Then Melanie had taken Marshall
back to his bed and tucked him in. She
wasn't at all sure that she believed
Security was at the nursery school, and
she knew that Marshall didn't either. But
they had both tried to believe it as hard
as they could.
In the morning it had still been
pouring down rain when it was time to
go to school, and Melanie's dad had
insisted on taking everyone to school in
his car on his way to the university—so
there had been no chance to check to see
if Security really was in the land of
Egypt. And, just as they both had feared,
he had not been at the nursery school. So
there had been nothing they could do but
wait for school to be over and the time
for Egypt to come.
Fortunately, it had stopped raining
during the day, although the sun never
came out. But when the time finally
came, and all six Egyptians squeezed
back through the fence into Egypt—
Security wasn't there, either. The storage
yard was wet and muddy—and bare.
Inside the temple, things were damp and
messy from the wind-blown rain. Ashes
and papers were blown around and
some plastic flowers had fallen off the
birdbath—but there was no sign of
Security anywhere.
That day Marshall wouldn't even take
part in the ceremony. He just sat on a
box against the fence and watched with
big sad eyes. Everybody tried to talk to
him and cheer him up, but he wouldn't
answer. Looking at him, the others
remembered with a feeling of shock that
he was awfully little. He usually seemed
bigger.
Somehow, no one felt very
enthusiastic about starting the ceremony,
without really knowing why. It was
almost as if they were a little bit afraid
of finding out whether there was any
mysterious writing on the slip of paper
that still hung, damply limp, from
Thoth's beak. But at last Melanie, whose
turn it was to be high priestess, got
things going. She did pretty much what
April had done the day before until she
got to the part where she took the slip of
paper out of Thoth's beak and read it. On
one side was April's question, just what
Melanie had thought it would be:
When will I go home again?
And on the other side—
Melanie looked up at the other
Egyptians with wide eyes, and then she
turned and looked, long and hard, at
Thoth. Finally she walked right out of
the temple, threw the paper on the
ground, and said, "I think we just better
stop playing this awful game."
Everyone crowded around, grabbing
for the paper and asking questions. As it
went the rounds, it left a lot of startled
faces behind it. The back of the paper,
which they all knew had been clean and
blank when they had left Egypt the night
before, was now covered with writing.
In the same small wavery hand that had
answered Ken's question, the oracle had
written:
The best thing we can do is
to make wherever we're lost
in Look as much like home as
we can.
Again, no one had seen the words
being written. Again, what they said
didn't sound like anything that a kid
would make up. Something very strange
was going on. As one person the five
biggest Egyptians turned and looked at
their temple. There on the left was the
altar to Set that they had built themselves
from nothing but an old egg crate, and on
top of it was the made-by-hand statue of
Set, looking a little more sunken and
slimy than usual from the blowing rain of
the night before. On the right was the
birdbath altar with the plaster head of
Nefertiti, lovely and gracious in spite of
the cracks and chips. And at the back
was the new altar to Thoth, with its
candles and incense still burning in front
of an old stuffed owl that Toby had cut
his teeth on.
It had only been a game. Of course, it
had been a very special one, more
serious and important and mysterious
than most—and a lot more fun. And there
had been times when it had seemed to
have a mysterious sort of reality about it.
But no one had believed, when you came
right down to it, that it was anything
more than a game. At least, no one had
until today.
"I think Ross is right," Ken said
suddenly. "I told you guys before there
was something kooky about this whole
thing." He grinned at Toby. "How about
it, Tobe? You ready to go back to
basketball?"
Toby shrugged. "I think you guys are a
bunch of chickens," he said. "Just when
things get good and something really
exciting starts happening, you want to
cop out. What I want to know is, if you
don't like a little excitement, why'd you
start fooling around with stuff like
Egyptian gods and ancient magic in the
first place?"
"Look, wise guy," April said, "it just
so happens that I didn't say I wanted to
cop out. And if you're so crazy about
excitement why don't you go jump off
the bridge or something? That ought to
be exciting enough to suit you. It just so
happens that some people think there's
such a thing as too much excitement."
Toby grinned at April in a way that
said he wasn't looking for a fight. "I'm
not arguing," he said. "If everyone wants
to split, it's all right by me. Let's just
forget—"
"No!" Marshall said suddenly in a
loud clear voice. It was the first thing
he'd said since he found out that Security
definitely wasn't in Egypt. "No!"
Marshall got up off his box and came
over to where the rest of them were
standing. His chin was up and he was
looking much more like himself. "Let's
not stop. Let's not stop till I ask a
question. I'm going to ask about
Security."
Everybody tried to talk him out of it.
April and Melanie and Elizabeth all
tried because they could see how hard
he was going to take it if the oracle
didn't come through. And for some
reason, Toby tried hardest of all. He
squatted down by Marshall and talked to
him a long time about how he didn't
think that was the kind of question that
oracles answered, but Marshall only
shut his eyes and shook his head and
said "NO!" And everybody knew that
Marshall never said no unless he meant
it.
So Melanie wrote,
WHERE IS
SECURITY?
on a piece of paper, because Marshall
didn't do much writing yet, and Toby
went through the ceremony just as he had
the two times before.
Marshall went home acting almost as
if Security had already been found, but
everyone else went home worried.
Melanie and April and Elizabeth and
Ken didn't quite know whether to worry
because the question might be answered
or because it might not be. The whole
thing was getting to be so weird and
creepy that they couldn't really wish for
another answer—but at the same time,
what were they going to do about
Marshall?
But Toby was the most worried of all.
Confession and
Confusion
THAT NIGHT, WHILE THE ORACLE OF
THOTH IN THE Land of Egypt struggled
with the question "Where is Security?",
Toby Alvillar struggled with his
conscience. He thought and worried and
thought; and at last he broke down and
did something entirely against his
principles—he called up a girl. When
April answered, all he said was, "Look,
I got to talk to you and Ross tomorrow
early. Meet you out by the parallel bars
first recess. Can't talk now—party line."
He had it all worked out so it
wouldn't look fishy. When recess
started, he went whooping down the hall
and down the stairs with the rest of the
guys who were headed for the basketball
court, but on the way down the stairs he
pretended to stumble and turn his ankle.
He denied that he was badly hurt, but he
managed to look bravely-in-pain as he
stumbled over to sit out the recess on the
bench near the parallel bars. The girls
were in the midst of a jump-rope fad, so
the parallel bars were pretty much
deserted.
When April and Melanie wandered
over—and registered exaggerated
surprise to find him there—he got right
to the point. "Look," he said, "I was the
one who wrote those answers. I was the
oracle. But I don't know where
Marshall's old octopus is. What're we
going to do?"
Of course April and Melanie had a
lot to say. They made Toby explain how
he'd managed to steal a peek at the
questions while he was conducting the
ceremonies—while everybody was
bowing—and then how he'd looked up
the main words in a big book of his
dad's, called Somebody's Famous
Quotations. Then, when he'd picked out
a nice mysterious quotation, he'd
sneaked back to Egypt at night with a
flashlight and written it on the back of
the paper.
"But how'd you get out of the house
like that, late at night and in the rain and
everything? Did your dad know?"
"Did my dad know?" Toby said.
Girls could ask the dumbest questions at
times. "Fat chance! He never bothers me
in the evenings. He's usually working
late in the studio or off at an art show
somewheres. It was a cinch."
"Weren't you scared?" Melanie
asked. "Going down there all by
yourself alone in the dark?"
"Well," Toby admitted, "I wasn't
exactly whistling ‘Yankee Doodle,' if
you know what I mean. Did you happen
to notice that the oracle's handwriting
was a little bit shaky? Well, I didn't just
do that to disguise my writing. As a
matter of fact, I was about to quit the
oracle business even before the rest of
you decided to, yesterday. That last night
when I went down there, there was
somebody in the alley when I was going
home."
The girls gasped. "Honestly? In the
rain and everything? Are you sure?"
"As sure as I'd want to be. In fact, for
a couple of seconds he was just a few
steps behind me. It was too dark to see
his face—but he was there, all right."
"Ohhh! What did you do? How'd you
get away?"
"How'd I get away? Look, Melanie,
you ought to know how I got away.
Who's been the fastest runner in our
class ever since second grade?"
"You," Melanie agreed.
"Right! And when I saw someone
behind me, I really cut out. I mean—jetpropelled
or something."
Toby could always manage to be
funny, even about something that was
really pretty scary. But after a while,
Melanie quit laughing and said, "But
who do you think it was? What if it was
the man who—"
"The murderer, you mean?" Toby
interrupted. "Yeah, I thought of that, all
right. Did I ever! But after I got home
and calmed down I decided it was
probably just some guy taking a shortcut
home through the alley. I'm not sure he
tried to catch me. I didn't wait around to
find out."
The girls laughed some more, but then
April sobered up enough to mention that
Toby's crimes weren't going entirely
unnoticed—fooling everybody, and lying
about the oracle—
"Lie to you!" Toby said. "I did not. I
didn't lie once. I just gave the wrong
impression. There's a difference.
Besides, I should think you'd be grateful
to me for going to all that trouble just to
keep things livened up. My dad says that
livening things up is my most outstanding
talent. But what I think is, somebody has
to do it. Or else everything would just
lie there and turn to dust."
"Okay," Melanie said. "So you really
livened up the oracle. You livened it up
so much that Marshall thinks it's going to
tell him where Security is. What are you
going to do about that?"
"What am I going to do about that?"
Toby said indignantly. "That's what I got
you out here to ask you. What are we
going to do about Marshall?"
"Well," April and Melanie said to
each other—only just with a look, not
out loud, "wasn't that like a boy. They
got things into a mess and then expected
a girl to get them out of it."
But, since Toby was admitting he
needed their help, they were willing to
give it. And it didn't take them long to
decide on a plan. April would conduct
the ceremony that afternoon, and she
would pretend to read something off the
back of the paper. It would say that
Security had gone on a trip to visit his
relatives in Los Angeles, and that he
would be home in a few days. Marshall
wouldn't be completely happy about it,
but at least it would give them a little
more time to look for Security, or to
think of something else.
"Then," Melanie explained, "if we
never can find him, at least Marshall
will have a few days to get used to the
idea, a little at a time. When you lose
something like Security, it helps if you
can do it sort of gradually." And Toby
and April agreed that that was probably
true.
Marshall was eager and happy when
they picked him up at nursery school.
Apparently, he was absolutely positive
that the oracle was going to find his
octopus for him.
In Egypt, April got ready to be the
high priestess again because she had
practiced just what she was going to say.
Fortunately, there wasn't much chance of
an argument. When it came to conducting
ceremonies, Ken and Elizabeth were
definitely the spectator type.
Everything was going smoothly until
April took down the question and with a
dramatic flourish got ready to pretend to
read. But then, instead of starting in on
her speech about Los Angeles, she let
her mouth drop open and nothing came
out except a strange gulping sound. Toby
bounded into the temple and snatched the
paper from her hand. Then he looked at
April in a strange way and they both
walked over to where the rest of the
Egyptians were waiting.
On the back of the paper, in a fine,
pointy, old-fashioned-looking
handwriting, it said:
Look under the throne
of Set
Toby read it out loud very slowly and
hesitantly, as if he didn't really believe
what he was saying; and while everyone
else was still standing as if paralyzed,
Marshall went into the temple and lifted
up the piece of old bedspread that
covered the egg-crate altar of Set. He
reached inside, felt around for a minute,
and then his face lit up with a smile so
starry that for just a second the other,
wiser Egyptians felt just as pleased with
their oracle as he did. But after that they
went right back to being incredulous.
April and Melanie looked hard at
Toby, but he shook his head so hard his
shaggy hair stood out like an umbrella.
"No sir!" he said wildly. "I didn't. I did
not! I absolutely did not do it!"
The girls looked at each other and
nodded in agreement that Toby was
telling the truth. Nobody, not even Toby,
was that good an actor.

"Toby didn't do it," Marshall said,
hugging a slightly damp octopus to his
chest. "Set did it."
"Set did what?" April asked, staring
at Marshall in consternation.
"Set took Security. I left him right
there on the ground, like I thought, and in
the nighttime Set took him."
"Sheee—eeesh!" Ken moaned all of a
sudden, clapping his fist violently to his
forehead. "I knew it! I knew all you guys
were going to crack up someday if you
didn't quit fooling around with this
hocus-pocus stuff."
"Nobody's cracking up," Toby said
thoughtfully, "but something pretty fishy
is going on around here."
"You're telling me," Ken said. "And
if somebody doesn't start telling me
what it is, I am going to walk right out of
here and resign from the whole Egyptian
race!"
"I guess we better, huh?" Toby said to
April and Melanie. "I mean, tell
everybody all about everything?" The
girls nodded.
So they went ahead and told the other
three all about what Toby had done—
and what Toby hadn't done—and when
they were through, they all stood and
looked at the temple that they had made
themselves, out of ordinary stuff and
their own imaginations, and felt—well,
maybe a little like Dr. Frankenstein had
when he created the monster. They just
stood there looking for a while and
wondering and then they all went home.
Fear Strikes
THE NEXT TWO OR THREE DAYS THE
EGYPTIANS MET in Egypt as usual, but
they didn't play games or consult the
oracle. It was damp, drippy weather but
with no real rain, and they all just sat
around on the floor of the temple in the
darkening late afternoons and talked and
talked. Toby and April wanted to try the
oracle once more to see what would
happen, but no one else seemed very
enthusiastic. Oh, they said "okay," but
somehow it kept getting put off. They
talked about it—but that was all.
They talked about a lot of things,
actually. Christmas wasn't far away, and
that's always a good topic for
conversation. But there was one subject
they kept coming back to—Security.
Where had Security been? How had he
gotten from wherever Marshall had left
him to the hiding place beneath the altar
of Set? And who had written the
message? There were dozens of
theories, more or less realistic,
depending on the mood of the moment.
There were times when they all
favored practical theories. Some other
kids might have found out about the game
and tried to be funny. But, as time went
by, and no one burst in on them to gloat
about the successful trick, that seemed
less and less likely. Or, someone of their
own group might have been guilty, just
as Toby had been at first; but no one
would confess, and there just didn't
seem to be any reasonable how and why
to support a conclusion of that sort. Then
there was the man Toby had seen in the
alley—but no one could come up with an
even slightly reasonable explanation of
who he was and how he could have
known about the oracle.
Of course, the subject of the murders
and the murderer came up, as it often
still did throughout the neighborhood. It
was still an unsolved mystery, and a
terribly real and dangerous one. But
fortunately, here again, there seemed to
be no logical reason to believe that that
mystery could have any connection with
the mystery of the oracle. Why would a
murderer fool around writing messages
about a missing toy? There seemed to be
no possible answer.
At other times, when the afternoon
was almost over and disturbing shadows
crept across the storage yard, a different
kind of theory went the rounds.
Somebody brought up the story of the
Curse of King Tut, and pointed out that
lots of people actually believed that a
mysterious magic power from the days
of the pharaohs was strong enough to do
terrible things to anyone who stirred it
up. What if somehow, in their
ceremonies and things, they'd managed
to stumble on a way to do some stirring
up themselves? Things like that had
happened. Everyone had read something
or seen something on TV like that. And
they all began to remember strange
things that had happened. Once when
Melanie had touched the Crocodile
Stone, she was sure she'd felt it move
under her fingers. And another time,
when Toby had gotten to Egypt early and
alone, he'd had the strangest feeling that
someone was watching him.
Once they got going on that sort of
thing, they all had stories and
experiences to tell. That is, all except
Marshall. He just sat, holding Security
on his lap and listening, and if he had
any theories about mysterious powers or
hidden watchers, he kept them strictly to
himself.
Then one evening there was to be a
concert at the university and the Rosses
decided to go. They were planning to
take Melanie, but since Marshall had a
way of going to sleep at concerts, it
seemed best to leave him at home. April
had some homework to do anyway, and
she agreed to come down and baby-sit
until the Rosses got back.
It was around 7:30 when Melanie
called to say they were leaving and
April said she would be right down. It
wasn't until she started to get her things
together that she realized her math book
was missing. She looked all over the
apartment but she couldn't find it
anywhere. At last she had to give up and
go without it.
When April got to the second floor,
the Rosses were waiting for her in the
hall. As soon as they saw her, they
waved good-bye and got into the
elevator. Marshall was standing in the
doorway.
"Hello," he said. "They said you
were coming to visit." Marshall didn't
like people to say "baby-sitter," but he
didn't mind having someone "visit" him
while his folks were away. So April
took some time to make it a real visit
before she started her own work. They
played a game of Mousetrap, and April
read aloud a short book about a
hippopotamus. Then Marshall went back
to something he was doing with a box
and two orange juice cans, and April
started her homework.
It was just about then that she finally
remembered what had probably
happened to her math book. That
afternoon, in Egypt, she'd put her books
down on the edge of the temple floor and
Ken had been fooling around and
knocked them off. He'd sort of picked
them up when she yelled at him, but he
must have left the math book on the
ground.
April sat there fuming for a few
minutes, getting madder and madder at
Ken. It was all his fault. For the first
time in her life she had been getting
pretty good grades in math, and now her
record was going to be ruined—all
because of Ken. Mrs. Granger was
terribly strict about getting assignments
in on time. All of a sudden she jumped
up. "Marshall," she called. "Do your
folks have a flashlight?"
When Marshall came back with the
flashlight, she told him what she had in
mind.
"Aren't you scared?" Marshall asked.
Now that he'd mentioned it, April
had to admit to herself that she was. But
being scared and chickening out were
two different things. Being scared to do
something had always made April more
determined to do it than ever. Besides, if
Toby could go down there all alone at
night, so could she.
"Me? Scared?" she said. "Don't be
ridiculous."
"Wait," Marshall said. He went in the
bedroom and came out with his sweater
and Security.
"Now, just a minute," April said.
"You can't go. I won't let you."
Marshall put his sweater on inside
out, all by himself. "Don't be
ridiculous," he said.
"Your folks wouldn't like it," April
argued. "I'll only be gone a minute.
You're going to wait right here."
Marshall was puzzling over his
buttons, which were on the wrong side,
and he didn't answer.
"I mean it," April said. "Whether you
like it or not, you are only four years
old, and I am taking care of you and you
have to do what I say. And I say that you
are going to stay right here and—"
Marshall gave up on the buttons. He
picked up Security and walked out the
door, into the hallway. He aimed himself
down the stairs towards where the
landlady lived. "I'll yell," he said.
For a few seconds April stared at him
in silence. Then she said some things
under her breath and, because there
didn't seem to be anything else to do,
she took Marshall by the hand and they
started out.
It was very quiet and very dark in the
alley and familiar things loomed up
suddenly, huge and out of shape. The
flashlight beam, none too steady in
April's hand, made trash bins crouch and
garbage pails lurk, and a length of hose
slither against a wall. Imagination is a
great thing in long dull hours, but it's a
real curse in a dark alley, and April's
imagination had always been out of the
ordinary. She would have hated to admit
it, but right at that moment, even a fouryear-old
was a little bit comforting.
Especially a four-year-old who could
march steadfastly by a garbage can that
had suddenly developed a hunchback
and great lopsided eyes, without even
seeming to notice.
It was April's imagination that made
trouble when they got to the fence;
because if she hadn't been imagining she
wouldn't have been so nervous. And if
she hadn't been so nervous, she
wouldn't have pushed the board the
wrong way. All the Egyptians always
pushed it to the right, and it no longer
squeaked when it swung that way.
But that night, probably because of
the nervousness, April grabbed the
board and shoved it the wrong way. And
the big crooked nails on which it swung
let out a wild rusty shriek.
April and Marshall froze into a
shocked silence. In the dark quiet alley
the shriek of the nails seemed
unbelievably loud. It seemed perfectly
possible that people a half-block away
had heard it and would come running.
But a half minute passed, and then
perhaps a whole minute, and nobody
came and not a sound was heard. At
least, not a sound that was loud enough
to be sure of. There was something—a
faint and faraway click and then a
dragging shuffle—so soft as to be almost
entirely lost in the distant drone of traffic
and the beating of a racing heart.
Finally, biting her lip, April pushed
the board the other way and shoved
Marshall through. Then she handed him
the flashlight and squeezed through
herself. Inside Egypt, April didn't feel
very much better. Ever since the
unsolved mystery of the oracle, Egypt,
although still fascinating, had ceased to
be an entirely comfortable place. She
went directly to the side of the temple
where her books had been.
"Marshall," she whispered, "shine
the light over here. I can't see a thing."
Marshall for some reason had turned
around and was aiming the light in the
opposite direction, on the wall of the
Professor's store, but at her whisper he
turned back. The book was right where
she thought it would be, shoved partway
back under the temple floor. She
snatched it up and with a hurried glance
at the temple, where the three altars
were only blobs of darkest black on a
black background, she hurried back to
the fence.
As Marshall held the light on the right
spot, April reached through, shoved the
board to the right side, and squeezed out.
She was holding the board open for
Marshall when, out of the darkness and
silence behind, something grabbed her
with crushing strength, and big hard
fingers smothered the scream that sprang
into her throat.
In one terrible moment April found
that the shock of certain danger is almost
always a battle call. Twisting frantically,
she managed to free her arms enough to
reach for and grab the loose board that
formed the door to the storage yard. She
held on desperately and the nails
shrieked again as the board swung far to
one side. For a fraction of a second
April's eyes, above the hand that gagged
her mouth, caught a glimpse of Marshall,
still standing just inside the fence
holding the flashlight and looking back
over his shoulder at the wall behind him.
"What's wrong with him?" she thought
frantically. "Why doesn't he scream for
help?"
The board was slipping slowly from
April's straining fingers, and the arm
around her chest was forcing the air
from her lungs, when suddenly, from
inside the storage yard, there was a
splintering crash and a strange hoarse
shout. "Help!" the strange voice rasped.
"Help!"
A window went up with a bang
somewhere nearby, and farther away
other voices began to call questions.
"What? What is it? What's the matter?"
And all the while the first strange voice
went on calling for help.
Then there were footsteps and shouts
at the mouth of the alley and suddenly the
crushing arms were gone. When the
rescuers arrived a moment later, they
found April lying on the ground and
Marshall squeezing out to meet them
through the fence. No one else was there,
and the only sound was the rasp of
April's breathing as she struggled to
force air back into her lungs.
The Hero
AFTERWARDS, GETTING TO THE POLICE
STATION AND the first things that
happened there were always hazy in
April's mind. There was a doctor who
talked to her and bandaged her hands
where she had scraped them on the rough
board. Then there were questions. She
explained how she and Marshall
happened to be in the alley, but the other
questions she couldn't answer and it
frightened her to try. "Who was he?"
they kept saying. "What did he look like?
Where did he go?" and April could only
say, "I don't know. I didn't see him. I
don't know. I don't know."
They tried to make her lie down on a
cot but she kept wanting to get up
because she was shaking so hard.
Whenever she tried to lie still, the
shaking would get worse and worse until
she ached from trying to stop it. Then the
doctor gave her a pill, and the shaking
got a little better and things were clearer
in her mind.
Suddenly she remembered about
Marshall. "Where's Marshall?" she
asked. "Is he all right?"
The man who had been asking the
most questions was called Inspector
Grant. He wasn't wearing a uniform, but
he was a policeman. When April asked
about Marshall, he grinned. "He's fine,"
he said. "He's right in the next room
over there."
"He's really all right," April insisted.
"He's not too scared, or anything?"
"Well, he doesn't act a bit scared,"
the inspector said. "He's sitting in there
on a desk holding a big stuffed octopus
and looking as cool as a cucumber. But
he won't answer any questions."
"Won't he talk to anybody?" April
said.
"Oh, he talks to us," Inspector Grant
said. "He's been asking us a lot of
questions, in fact. He just won't answer
any. Every time we ask anything he just
says, ‘No.' We think he might have seen
more than you did. Do you suppose he'd
answer a few questions if you ask him?"
"He might," April said. "I don't
know."
When Marshall saw April he slid
down off the desk and came running.
"Hi," he said, giving her one of his rare
starry smiles. April hugged him hard.
Then she asked what the inspector had
told her to ask.
"Marshall, did you see the—the man
—the man who grabbed me?" Saying the
words made the shaking start all over
again.
"Yes," Marshall said. "I saw him. I
tried to yell but I couldn't. My throat
was stuck." He looked worried, as if he
wanted to be sure that April understood.
"You did fine," April told him. "But
about the man—what did he look like?"
"A man. A big man."
"Was he young or old?"
Marshall thought a minute. "Old," he
said.
"What color was his hair?"
"Orange."
April looked at Inspector Grant. "Ask
about his race," the policeman
prompted.
"Was he a black or a white man?"
April asked.
"No," Marshall said thoughtfully,
shaking his head.
April thought he didn't understand.
She took his arm and rubbed her finger
on his skin. "Was his skin like yours or
like mine?" She held out her own arm.
"No," Marshall said, more firmly.
"He was spotted."
"Would you know him if you saw him
again?" Inspector Grant interrupted.
Marshall only looked at him without
answering. The inspector gave an
exasperated sigh and turned to April.
"He's not just being stubborn," April
explained. "I think he just wants to be
sure he isn't telling a secret. Marshall
never tells secrets." She turned to
Marshall and repeated the question.
Marshall nodded. "Yes. I know him."
Just then there was a commotion at the
door and Inspector Grant stood up. April
wasn't sure if he heard Marshall say,
"He's that man who carries things at the
store."
The inspector hurried to the door and
April heard him say, "The boy says he'd
know the man if he saw him." There was
more talk and confusion and finally a
man was led into the room. It was the
Professor.
April was sure it was the Professor,
but he looked quite different from her
memory of him. His hair was mussed,
his face moved nervously, and the dead
calm was gone from his eyes. He looked
at Marshall, and Marshall looked at him.
"Hello," Marshall said.
The inspector took hold of April's
arm and whispered a question. She
gazed at the Professor in horror. Could it
have been? Had he really been the one
all the time? All that time while they
were playing every day in his yard.
Obediently, but with a shaky voice, she
transferred the question to Marshall.
"Marshall, is that the man? Is that the
one who grabbed me?"
"No," Marshall said. "That's the man
who watches us all the time. He was
looking out his window, like always. He
was the one who said, ‘Help.' "
The Professor smiled wearily.
"That's what I've been trying to tell you
—"
But now Marshall realized that they
still hadn't understood. He shook April's
arm to get her attention and explained it
all again as patiently as he could. "I told
you!" he said. "I told you who it was. It
was that spotted man with orange hair.
The one who carries things at the toy
store."
At last April understood. "Oh-h-h,"
she said. "I think he means that
redheaded man who works for Mr.
Schmitt sometimes. He's a stockboy or
something."
Two of the policemen hurried off, and
Inspector Grant led April back to the
other room and told her to lie down
again and rest. This time Marshall came
with them and climbed up on a chair
beside the cot. He put Security on his lap
and looked around with interest. Seeing
him there made April feel calmer.
She lay on the cot and tried to keep
from shivering. And she tried not to think
about the redheaded man. Instead she
thought about the Professor. "Marshall,"
she said, raising up on one elbow, "did
you say the Professor's been watching
us?"
Marshall nodded. "Out his window,"
he said. "And he broke it with a stick
and said, ‘Help.' I couldn't. My throat
was stuck."
It gave April a funny feeling to think
that they'd been watched all that time, or
at least whenever the Professor felt like
it—but it was certainly a good thing he'd
been watching tonight. It was a good
thing he "said help," as Marshall put it.
The inspector, who was sitting at the
other end of the cot, broke in as if he
could read her thoughts. "It was
certainly lucky that the old man was
there to shout for help," he said. "You
know that's the best thing to do in a
situation like that. Your voice is your
best defense."
"But I couldn't call," April said,
covering her face and trying not to
remember so vividly the fingers across
her mouth and throat. Inspector Grant
leaned over and patted her shoulder.
"I know," he said soothingly. "But it's
all over now. And it all worked out just
fine, didn't it. You're all right, and
Marshall here has been a real
detective."
"Why did they think the Professor did
it?" April asked after a while.
"Well, they weren't sure, of course,"
the inspector said. "But some of the
officers thought he was a pretty good
suspect. Living right there in the
neighborhood, and he couldn't give us an
alibi for the nights when the other—for
the other times. And then tonight, with it
happening right in his backyard and all.
And when some of the boys went to the
door of his store and he came running
out looking wild-eyed and excited, it
seemed best to bring him in for
questioning at least. He told them that
he'd called for help from his window,
but I guess they weren't buying his story
much, until Marshall stood up for him."
It was then that Caroline came in. She
ran across the room and hugged April up
into her arms and held her tight. When
April realized that Caroline was crying,
she began to cry, too. She hadn't cried at
all until then, and she really didn't want
to, but when they both stopped crying,
the tension was gone and the shaking,
and she felt much better. She was
suddenly very tired and sleepy.
"Grandma," she said, "would you ask
them if we can go home now? I'm
terribly tired."
To Marshall's delight they rode home
in a police car, and they left a note on the
Rosses' door because they weren't back
from the concert yet. It was amazing to
April to think that so little time had
passed—it seemed like years and years.
In their own apartment they made a bed
for Marshall on the couch and he went
right off to sleep as if nothing had
happened, with his arm around Security.
April went to bed, too, but it took her a
long time to get to sleep, and Caroline
sat beside the bed until she finally did.
April always hated to be fussed over,
but it was sort of nice to open her eyes
now and then and see Caroline just
sitting there, quietly reading a book.
Of course, the math didn't get done;
but as it turned out, it didn't really
matter, because April stayed home from
school the next day, and her grandmother
took the day off, too. April was feeling
fine, except for the bandages on her
hands and some bruises on her cheeks
and ribs. In the afternoon the police
came to take her back to the station to
look at some men in the lineup. She
wasn't much help because she really
hadn't seen the man at all. But Marshall
had to go, and he wanted April to come,
too, and the police seemed to think that
she might remember something that
would be useful.
When the men came in for the lineup,
there was the big stocky man with red
hair and blotchy red-brown freckles
from Schmitt's Variety Store, the one
who was the stockboy, and Marshall
pointed to him right away. April
remembered that when she had seen him
in the store, he had seemed quiet and
shy, and in the lineup he looked
bewildered, as if he didn't understand
what had happened.
The next day it was all in the papers.
The redheaded man had admitted
everything. There wasn't going to be a
real trial because the man was very sick
mentally and was to be sent to a hospital
for the criminally insane. He was a
relative of Mr. Schmitt and he had
always had something wrong with his
mind. He couldn't get a good job, and
sometimes Mr. Schmitt let him work as a
stockboy in his store. He'd work for a
while and then he'd go away and do
something else. But he always came
back again, and since he was willing to
work for very little money, Mr. Schmitt
always hired him again. The police
hadn't found out about him before
because Mr. Schmitt had always given
him an alibi. But when the redheaded
man confessed, and told all about things
he couldn't have known unless he was
guilty, Mr. Schmitt decided that he hadn't
been positive of his cousin's
whereabouts at the times of the crimes.
He only thought he knew.
April's picture was in the paper and
so was Marshall's. There was a long
story about how Marshall had saved the
Professor from being unjustly accused
and described the murderer so that the
police were able to catch him. But April
and Melanie were a little bit disgusted
with the way the reporter talked about
Marshall's description. After all, he was
spotted, in a way, and his hair was more
orange than anything else. He really
wasn't old, as Marshall had said; but, as
Melanie pointed out, when you are only
four yourself, almost anybody's old by
comparison.
Anyway, Marshall was a real hero
around the neighborhood. Everyone
wanted to see him and ask him questions
about what happened. The Rosses tried
to keep him home for a while because
they said they didn't want him getting an
exaggerated notion of his own
importance. But they needn't have
worried. Marshall took the whole thing
very calmly. In fact, being a hero didn't
seem to change him a bit except for one
thing.
When the photographer came to take
his picture for the paper, Marshall took
Security into the bedroom and put him on
his bed. He said Security didn't want his
picture taken. After that he started
leaving Security home sometimes when
he went places, and before too long he
didn't need to have Security with him at
all anymore, excepting to hold on to at
night when he was sleepy.
Gains and Losses
THINGS HAD SCARCELY HAD TIME TO QUIET
DOWN after April's narrow escape when
Christmas vacation arrived. The first
few days of vacation, the members of the
Egypt gang were pretty busy with family
things like shopping and trips and
relatives, but now and then some of their
paths crossed and they stopped to
discuss things in general, and the Egypt
situation in particular. That situation
didn't look good at all.
The day after all the excitement, Toby
had drifted down the alley just to look
things over, and he had found the land of
Egypt boarded up. Someone had
replaced the loose board and nailed it
into place with big, long nails, and some
fresh strands of barbed wire had been
strung around the top. The consensus of
opinion was pretty much, "That's that!"
Egypt was lost and gone forever, and
there was no use thinking about it. It was
a terrible loss.
As a matter of fact, the Egyptians
hadn't really realized until then just how
great Egypt had been. It had been a
terrific game, full of excitement and
mystery and way-out imagining, but it
had been a great deal more than that. It
had been a place to get away to—a
private lair—a secret seclusion meant to
be shared with best friends only—a life
unknown to grown-ups and lived by kids
alone. And now, all of a sudden, it was
gone.
But the other Egyptians didn't blame
April and Marshall for its loss. After all,
they hadn't done it on purpose, and the
way it turned out they had really done all
the kids in the neighborhood a big favor
—because now that the murderer had
been caught everybody was being
allowed a lot more freedom. The whole
neighborhood had benefited, really.
There was only Egypt to mourn.
It was a few days after the beginning
of vacation that April decided to go
down and pay a visit to the Professor, or
Dr. Huddleston, as people were
beginning to call him. The visit had been
her grandmother's suggestion in the first
place, but April agreed that it was a
good idea. As she started downstairs,
she considered stopping by for Melanie,
but she decided against it. It was better
to go alone on such a personal errand.
And she really did have something very
personal to say.
But if April had imagined that it
would be easy to have a quiet personal
interview with the Professor in his
lonely store, she was mistaken. There
were two or three browsers just looking
around; the Professor was wrapping
something up for a customer; and over
by the window Elizabeth's mother, Mrs.
Chung, was dusting some figurines and
arranging them in the display case. The
whole store looked different—cleaner
and brighter and not so cluttered. April
was amazed.
For one thing, Mrs. Chung had been
working at a cleaners over on the other
side of town, and April hadn't heard
anything about a change. But then,
Elizabeth had been visiting in San
Francisco with her cousins the last few
days, so April wasn't really up to date
on the Chung family news.
"Hi, Mrs. Chung," April said. "Do
you work here now?"
"Hello, April. Yes I do. I just began
on Monday."
It didn't look as if the Professor was
going to be free very soon, so April
squatted down to look at the tiny foreignlooking
statues that Mrs. Chung was
arranging very artistically on a velvet
cloth.
"I think this would be a neat place to
work," April said. "I'd sure like it."
"It's a very interesting place to
work," Mrs. Chung said. "And it's
wonderful being so close to home. I
think I'm going to like it very much. Dr.
Huddleston is planning to do some
traveling soon to look for new things to
sell, and I'll be in charge here while
he's gone." Mrs. Chung smiled
delightedly, and April noted that her
dimples were just like Elizabeth's.
"There sure are a lot of people in
here," April mentioned, just to make
conversation.
Mrs. Chung smiled. "I guess it's been
that way all the time lately. Poor Dr.
Huddleston's almost worn himself out
taking care of them. Of course, some of
them are just curious, because of all the
publicity and everything in the papers.
But a lot of them are neighborhood
people who are feeling ashamed about
suspecting him when he was innocent.
They come in here and buy things they
don't even need, just to ease their
consciences."
April grinned. "I'll bet the people
who signed that petition Mr. Schmitt sent
around buy the most of all."
"No doubt," Mrs. Chung said. "I've
heard that Mr. Schmitt is selling out.
This whole thing must have been very
hard on him."
"Well, I don't feel sorry for him,"
April said. "I'll bet he had a notion that
his cousin was the murderer but he
didn't want to believe it. And that was
why he was so sure it was the Professor.
That's what my grandmother says."
"I guess that's something we'll never
know," Mrs. Chung said. She nodded
towards the Professor. "I think Dr.
Huddleston is free now if you wanted to
see him."
The Professor shook April's hand,
and he smiled ever so slightly when she
said, "I came to say thanks a lot for
saving my life." He looked pretty much
as April remembered him and his voice
was still gravelly and grave, but he
seemed younger, somehow, and more
lively.
"You're most welcome," he said.
"But I'm not at all sure I was
responsible. I feel sure your young
friend would have found some other
means to aid you if I had not been
available."
"Oh, you mean Marshall?" April
said. "Yeah, isn't he something!"
The Professor agreed that he certainly
was, and then there was an
uncomfortable pause and April for once
was at a loss for words.
At last the Professor said, "I have
something here you might like to see."
He took down a small box and opened it
carefully on the counter. There were two
objects in it, a flat piece of marble with
dim hieroglyphics on it, and a small
head of a glowing milky white.
"Ohhh," April said. "That's alabaster,
isn't it?"
"Very good," the Professor said.
"You're quite an Egyptologist. And the
other is a bit of marble facing from the
wall of a tomb."
They examined the pieces together,
and the Professor told April all sorts of
interesting things about them. He also
said that they had once belonged to his
wife—and that was an interesting idea in
itself, to think that the lonely old
Professor had once had a wife. In the
course of the conversation it occurred to
April that this would be a good time to
mention all the things that had been left
in the land of Egypt. The six Egyptians
had thought about them many times and
wondered if the Professor intended to
give them back. Toby, in particular,
hated to lose Thoth—he was a sort of
keepsake. Two or three times she was on
the verge of mentioning it, but each time
she lost her nerve. After all, they had put
the things on the Professor's property,
and maybe that meant they were his now.
And you just can't go around demanding
things of someone who's just saved your
life.
But, except for the fact that the
Professor didn't offer to give back their
things, it was a very successful visit. As
April was getting ready to go, she said,
"Well, good-bye, and thanks again,
Profes—I mean Dr. Huddleston. My
grandmother says your name is Dr.
Julian Huddleston. Are you really a
doctor?"
"Not a medical doctor. A doctor of
philosophy—a Ph.D. I once taught at the
university, but that was a long time ago.
I'd be most pleased if you and your
friends continued to call me the
Professor. I'd prefer it, in fact."
"So do I," April said. "Okay, goodbye,
Professor. And thanks again."
When April got back to the apartment,
there was a letter waiting for her. It was
from her mother. It was the first letter
April had had for over a month. Of
course, Dorothea would probably have
written if she'd known about April's
narrow escape, but she hadn't known.
For some reason, April hadn't told her,
and she'd asked Caroline not to either.
When Caroline had asked April why,
she'd just said, "I don't know. What's
the use. It's too late now."
But today there was a letter, and an
invitation.
Darling,
Nick and I are planning on
spending three or four days in
Palm Springs over Christmas.
We want you to hop on a plane
and fly down to us. There'll be
swimming and sunning and lots
of fun. We'll meet you at the
airport if you let us know when
and where. We're dying to see
you again.
Love,
Dorothea
April took the letter to her room. She
sat down by the window and reread it
three times and felt around inside herself
for reactions. She found some, all right,
both good and bad; but not nearly as
much either way as she would have
expected. Not as much happiness to be
asked, and not nearly as much anger to
be asked so late and for so little. After a
while she got out some paper and wrote
an answer. Then she took both letters
and went looking for Caroline. She
found her in the kitchen sewing sequins
on a Christmas stocking made of felt.
Without saying anything, April put the
letters down in front of her.
Dear Dorothea, (April's letter
said)
Thank you for inviting me to
Palm Springs. It sounds like
lots of fun. But Grandma and I
have our plans all made for
Christmas Eve and I have a date
to spend part of Christmas Day
with my friend, Melanie. So I
guess I can't make it this time.
Love,
April
P.S. You should see our tree.
We decorated it yesterday
and it's great.
Caroline was such a quiet person it
was hard sometimes to know what she
was thinking. But lately, April usually
thought she could tell. Right then,
Caroline only smiled and said, "That's a
very nice letter, dear," and bent her head
back down over the sequins. And the sun
coming in the little stained-glass section
of the breakfast room window made her
smooth gray hair look just like a
pigeon's wing.
Christmas Keys
ON THE MORNING OF CHRISTMAS EVE,
CAROLINE had a telephone call from the
Professor, and afterwards she asked
April to phone all the members of the
Egypt gang and ask them to come to the
Halls' for just a few minutes that night
after dinner. "The Professor wants to see
you," she said. "He said he knows you'll
all want to be with your families tonight
and he won't keep you long. But he
wants to see all six of you for just a few
minutes."
"What for?" April asked.
"I think he wants it to be a surprise,"
Caroline said.
So April called up all the other
Egyptians and made the invitation sound
just as mysterious and intriguing as she
could. Personally, she had a suspicion
that the Professor was just going to give
back all their stuff, but as Toby said,
there's nothing like keeping things
livened up.
After dinner Caroline made some hot
spiced cider, and April arranged a plate
of fancy Christmas cookies that she and
Caroline had baked. Just about then the
guests started to arrive. Ken and Toby
came first, looking slightly embarrassed
to be visiting where a girl lived. Then
Melanie arrived with Marshall, and
Elizabeth came a few minutes
afterwards. They sat around for a while
drinking cider and listening to a
Christmas carol program. They
speculated about what the Professor had
in mind, and had just about agreed that
he was probably bringing back all their
stuff, when he arrived—apparently
empty-handed. So that was the end of
that theory.
The Professor gave April his coat
and said hello to everyone in his strange
formal way. Caroline got everyone
seated again and turned the music down
very low; but for a while they all just sat
there feeling uncomfortable. The whole
situation was so unusual that nobody
knew quite how to act.
At last the Professor put down his
cup, looked around the room, and said,
"I've come to tell you a story."
Out of the corner of her eye, April
saw Ken and Toby exchange raised
eyebrows. She narrowed her eyes and
nailed them both with her fiercest glare.
When somebody saves your life, it
makes him sort of your property, and
nobody was going to make fun of the
Professor with April around, even if he
was going to treat them as if they were
little kids.
"A Christmas story?" Marshall asked.
"No—" the Professor began, but then
he paused. "Yes," he said, "I suppose it
is. I suppose it is a Christmas story, in a
way. But it's a sad story—a terrible
story—too terrible for children, perhaps.
And yet, I feel that it's something the six
of you ought to know."
April felt, rather than saw, Ken and
Toby prick up their ears. She gave an
internal nod of approval. He had them
now. The Professor was doing all right.
"The story begins when I was a young
man. I was really a professor then, at the
university. I was always a very quiet and
reserved person and at that time my life,
even my work, was beginning to seem
rather dull and routine. But then one day,
a young woman enrolled in one of my
classes and changed my entire way of
life. Her name was Anne."
April and Melanie looked at each
other and their eyes made extravagant
comments.
"Anne was an artist," the Professor
went on. "My subject was anthropology,
which, as you may know, is the study of
all the various kinds and conditions of
mankind. Anne was not particularly
interested in anthropology, but she
enrolled in a class I was teaching on
primitive and ancient peoples because of
her interest in primitive art. Anne used
to tease me about anthropology—she
said anthropologists were only
interested in people in general and she
liked people in particular—and she did,
too. All kinds of people. She was at ease
with everyone—lighthearted, fun-loving,
enthusiastic and optimistic. There was a
hopefulness about her—Well, after we
were married I began to see life in a
new way.
"Anne was delighted when I decided
to travel and do research. While I
studied various tribes, she studied their
art forms and collected samples of their
crafts. And usually she managed to get
involved in various efforts to improve
the living conditions of the people of the
area. The A–Z store was Anne's idea, in
the beginning. Her plan was to make it
an outlet for some of the native
handicrafts from areas where we had
worked. It was on our last visit home
together that she bought the building and
made the first arrangements."
The Professor paused as if he was
trying to think what to say next. "On our
last trip," he went on at last, "Anne was
visiting a mission where she was trying
to set up a production center for native
handicrafts. The people of the area were
very poor and she thought it would
provide them with a means of earning a
better living. There had been some
unrest in the next province, but we
thought—Well, there was an uprising, a
small local rebellion. The mission was
attacked and Anne was killed—by the
very people she was trying to help.
"I came back here. I had no desire to
teach, so I sold our house and moved
into Anne's store. I had some idea of
opening the store and operating it along
the lines that Anne had planned, but I
soon gave it up. I gradually broke off
many of the contacts that Anne had made
and let the store become a junk shop. I
had a small income so I didn't have to
make the business pay, but for some
reason I kept the store open.
"As the years went by, the store and I
became dusty junkyards, and after a
while I didn't care."
The Professor looked up and around
the circle of intent faces, and his lips
moved in their slight smile. "And then
one day," he said, "I heard a strange
noise in my storage yard. At first, I told
myself I was watching to make sure
nothing was damaged and no fires were
started. You know, sacred fires can be
just as dangerous as ordinary ones.
Then, after the murder, when my
business dropped to almost nothing and I
had little else to do, I watched more and
more often."
"You mean, you watched us do the
Ceremony for the Dead and the oracle
and all that stuff?" April asked.
"Yes, all of that."
The Egyptians exchanged sheepish
glances, and Ken hit himself on the
forehead in an agony of embarrassment.
"Sheesh!" he moaned.
"The oracle!" Toby said suddenly.
"Hey! You didn't have anything to do
with—"
The Professor nodded. "I'm afraid I
must plead guilty to that, too. I watched
you leave that night and I saw the
octopus left behind in the rain. I went out
and pried open the old padlock and went
into the yard. The wind was blowing the
rain into the shed quite badly and under
the altar covering seemed the driest
place. I was getting wet and was in such
a hurry that I didn't stop to consider that
it might be hard to find. Then, as I was
watching the next day I suddenly
conceived of a plan to direct you to the
lost article by way of"—he paused and
his lips moved again in his small stiff
smile—"the oracle.
"What I did then, in behalf of
Security, was done on the spur of the
moment, and afterwards I tried not to
think about it. I think I decided to play
the part of the oracle because I felt
obligated to let you know what I had
done with Security, and the oracle
offered a way to do it without any direct
contact. And contact—involvement—
was what I had spent years eliminating
entirely from my life.
"I had begun to suspect, however, that
one of you"—the Professor looked at
Marshall—"knew that I was watching.
But he was very careful in the way he
watched back. I wasn't entirely sure
until the night of the attempt on April's
life.
"I was reading when I heard a sound
in the storage yard and, of course, I went
immediately to the window. When I saw
—when I realized what was happening,
my first reaction was the natural one. I
grabbed up a block of wood—but then,
twenty-five years of self-imprisonment
took control. I couldn't bring myself to
break the glass and call.
"I stood there holding the block of
wood in my hand, and then Marshall
turned around and looked at me. I could
see that he knew that I was there and that
he was asking me to help. And then I
broke the glass—"
The Professor's voice stopped and
everyone waited until, at last, it became
clear that his story was over, even
though it hadn't sounded like an ending
at all. For a long time no one moved or
talked. The room was very still except
for a boys' choir singing "Hark the
Herald Angels" very softly on the radio.
But then Marshall leaned over and
poked Melanie. "Is that the end?" he
whispered loudly.
"Shhh!" Melanie said, and nodded.
"But what was the Christmas part?"
Marshall whispered even more loudly.
The Professor must have heard
Marshall but he didn't answer. Instead
he began to feel around in his jacket
pocket. There was a jingling sound, and
he brought out a handful of shiny new
keys. The keys had long chains to wear
around your neck, and on the head part
of each one a name was engraved. The
Professor read off the names one by one
and handed out the keys. "Elizabeth,
Toby, Melanie—"
"Is it—is it to Egypt?" Elizabeth
whispered as she took her key, and at the
Professor's nod there was a storm of
comment.
"Hey, neat!"
"Awesome!"
"Thanks a lot."
"Hey, yeah, thanks."
"Thanks a lot."
"Of course, you'll have to enter on
the other side of the yard now," the
Professor said. "I've had a new padlock
put on the door—a padlock with just six
keys—"
Caroline got up and went to the
kitchen for a fresh round of cider and
cookies, but everyone was too busy
talking and planning to be much
interested in food. "No, not tomorrow,"
Melanie said. "Tomorrow's Christmas
and we'll have to be home most of the
time. But the next day—"
"Yeah," Toby agreed, "we'll be doing
the togetherness bit at our pad tomorrow,
too. My dad's even promised to stay out
of his studio all day. But the day after's
okay by me."
So the date was made—Egypt, the
day after Christmas, right after lunch.
Then everybody got up and started
getting ready to go home. At the door
Ken turned back. "Uh, Professor," he
said. "Are you going to—that is—are
you still going to watch us all the time?"
Everybody laughed. "No, I'm afraid I
won't have time," the Professor said. "I
seem to have gotten myself involved in
being a real storekeeper. I'm going to try
to do some importing again, handicrafts
and curios. I'll be doing quite a bit of
traveling for a while until I get my stock
lined up. But perhaps, once in a while
when I'm home, you'll invite me to a
special occasion."
"Sure," Toby said, "that'll be great.
And thanks again for the great present. I
sure wish we had something for you."
"Yes," some of the others chimed in.
"We should have brought something for
you."
The Professor held up his hand. "But
I thought you understood," he said.
"You've already made me a gift—a very
important one." He smiled his strange
solemn smile and put his hand on
Marshall's head. "That's how I should
have ended my story—if I could have
explained it—with your gift to me. That
would have been the Christmas part.
That's what makes it a Christmas story."
• • •
Late the next afternoon April and
Melanie lay across April's bed and
chatted. They were stuffed to contented
laziness with Christmas dinner and they
had been down to Melanie's apartment
to look at her presents and then up to
look at April's.
They had talked about Christmas and
presents until the subject was exhausted
and then they began to talk about the keys
and the Professor and what he'd said the
evening before.
They just lay there for a while,
dreaming and digesting, and then
Melanie suddenly sat up. "I feel sad,"
she said.
April made a "why?" expression.
"Oh, I don't know," Melanie said. "It's
about Egypt. Going back and everything.
It seems like it won't be the same."
"Yeah," April said. "I thought about
that, too."
"We'll go back, thinking it will be so
terrific—and what will we do? The
same things all over again? We've done
just about everything exciting about
Egypt."
"Yeah, and it's just awful when you
go back to something that was so great
the way you remembered it and it's no
good anymore. It even ruins
remembering."
Melanie nodded tragically and they
both collapsed again. They lay there,
staring into the future gloomily for a
while, their chins on their hands. Then
April turned towards Melanie, slowly
and thoughtfully.
"Melanie," she said, "what do you
know about Gypsies?"
Turn the page
for your first glimpse of
by Zilpha Keatley Snyder
CHAPTER
I
is birth certificate, if he even
had one, probably just said Willy
Baggett, but for most of the seventh
grade he'd been signing his school
papers William S. Baggett.
William S. Baggett
But that, too, would change as soon
as he made his move. No more Baggett
then—and good riddance.
Actually, he'd started thinking about
running away almost seven years ago.
That was when he'd started going to
school and began to learn, among other
things, that not everybody behaved like
Baggetts. And not very long after that he
began putting every penny he could get
his hands on into what he thought of as
his Getaway Fund. Well, not quite every
penny. He did spend a dime, now and
then, on a Saturday matinee at the Roxie
Theater. Watching how your favorite
movie actors could make you believe
they were all those different people was
one thing he'd never been able to do
without.
In spite of an occasional movie, his
secret stash had grown pretty fast while
the Baggetts still lived in the city, where
there were lots of lawns to mow and
flower gardens to water and weed. And
even after they had to get out of town,
he'd managed to add a few coins now
and then by doing odd jobs at school—
carrying stuff for teachers, and mopping
up on rainy days for Mr. Jenkins, the
janitor.
He'd made other plans and
preparations too. Besides saving his
earnings, he began to keep a long,
narrow knapsack beside his bed, and all
his most important belongings right there
within arm's reach, ready to push into it.
And then, someday, he would take his
Getaway Fund out of its supersecret,
hard-to-reach hiding place, sling his
knapsack over his shoulder, and simply
walk away. And that would be that.
But what then? Where would he run
to? Over the years he'd changed his
mind a lot, but just recently he'd come
up with some interesting possibilities.
Like, how about Hollywood? Or
Broadway in New York City? Or even
better, Stratford-upon-Avon. Okay, not
likely. But, "We are such stuff as dreams
are made on." Right?
He never told anyone, of course. Not
even Jancy, at least not until after she'd
pretty much guessed. But the little bit
Jancy knew didn't worry him that much.
His sister would never do anything to
ruin his future career. He was sure of
that. Well, he had been sure anyway,
until the day her guinea pig got flushed
down the toilet, which not only messed
up the plumbing, but apparently changed
everything.
Sweetie Pie had been Jancy's pet
ever since her fourth-grade teacher got
tired of a health class experiment that
involved feeding some guinea pigs fruits
and vegetables, and some others nothing
but candy and cookies. Sweetie Pie had
been one of the stunted sweet-stuff pigs,
and she never quite made it to normal
guinea pig size. Not even after Jancy
went to the trouble to clear off a stretch
of cluttered, weed-grown land to plant a
vegetable garden. She did manage to
grow a little bit of healthy stuff for
Sweetie Pie, and she would have grown
a lot more if Gary and the twins hadn't
decided to use her garden plot as one
end of their football field.
Even though Sweetie Pie never got
much bigger, she was, according to
Jancy, the smartest, cutest guinea pig that
ever lived. But then came the first of
August, 1938, and Sweetie Pie's story
came to a sad end.
William found out about it soon after
it happened, when he overheard the
twins snickering outside the bathroom
door. What he heard them saying was
how they'd managed to "get rid of that
stinkin' rat, and let Buddy take the rap."
William wanted to pound on the door
and yell at them—not that that would
have accomplished anything, except
getting himself beaten to a pulp. Besides
being extra big for fourteen-year-olds,
Al and Andy were extra vicious. So
William bit his lip and went looking for
Jancy.
For a while he couldn't find her
anywhere. Not in the room she shared
with Trixie and Buddy, and not
anywhere else in the big old wreck of a
house. Not hiding behind any of the
junkyard furniture in what might once
have been a pretty nice living room, or
out on the halfway collapsed veranda,
either. But then, as he was checking the
back hall, there she was, walking toward
her room with her mop of hair hiding her
face as usual. But when she saw him, she
put her finger in her ear—their secret
signal that asked for a talk in their
private hideout.
Okay, fine. No amount of talk was
going to do poor Sweetie Pie any good
at that point, but William knew how
Jancy must be feeling, and if talking
would help, he was ready to listen.
Ready and willing, even though it meant
making a feverish (hay feverish, that is)
trip to the barn—the huge, saggy, roofed
building that sat about fifty yards from
the condemned farmhouse where the
Baggetts had been hanging out ever since
they got more or less kicked out of
downtown Crownfield.
Nowadays the barn was a kind of
junkyard where all the Baggetts who
were old enough to drive—not to
mention the ones who drove even though
they weren't old enough—had stashed
the body parts of a whole lot of dead hot
rods, pickup trucks, and motorcycles.
Down there on the ground floor the
scene was nothing but rusty carcasses,
but up above the car cemetery there was
a secret place that nobody seemed to
know about except William and Jancy. A
deserted area that must have been a
hayloft back in the days when the huge
old building had been a cow barn
instead of a car dump.
So a moldy hayloft had become their
favorite place to have a really private
conversation, in spite of what it always
did to William's hay fever. He didn't
mind that much about the hay fever thing.
Being forced to choose between being
teased and tormented or having hay fever
wasn't nearly the worst thing about
being at the bottom of the Baggett
pecking order.
On the plus side, the loft was fairly
handy. All it took was a well-timed
scamper across the cluttered yard to the
barn door. And then a careful zigzag
around and over fractured fenders and
rusty radiators until you got to a narrow
ladder that led up to a place where you
could scrunch down behind a big pile of
moldy hay and be fairly sure none of the
bigger Baggetts would show up.
Up behind the haystack, in between
William's sneezing and sniffing fits, he
and Jancy had now and then managed to
come up with the kind of plans that were
necessary in order to survive as
comparatively small and defenseless
Baggetts. Plans like how to discourage
Gary from throwing your books off the
bus on the way to school, or where to
hide your most precious possessions
where Al and Andy couldn't get at them.
So it was up there in the hayloft that
William was waiting when Jancy's curly
head and red, weepy eyes appeared over
the edge of the loft floor.
The weepy eyes were no surprise.
But what he certainly hadn't foreseen
was how the conversation began. The
very first words out of Jancy's mouth
were, "Look here, William, I know
you're getting ready to run away. You
are, aren't you?"
Puzzled, William shrugged. "Well,
yeah, I guess so. Sooner or later. Why?"
He was still wondering what his
plans for the future had to do with the
sad fate of Sweetie Pie, when Jancy
cleared that up by explaining that she
had decided that what happened to
Sweetie Pie was the last straw.
"I'm just plain finished with being a
Baggett," she told William fiercely. "So
I'm going to run away too, as soon as
ever I can."
William was shocked. "What are you
talking about?" he said. "You're only
eleven years old. A little kid like you
can't just take off all by yourself."
Jancy threw up her hands. "Listen to
me, William," she said. "I didn't mean
all by myself. I said too. Like, with you.
And it has to be real soon. Like maybe
tomorrow. Don't you get it?"
William got it, but he didn't like it.
However, he knew from experience that
when Jancy really made her mind up
about certain kinds of things that was
pretty much it—not much use to argue.
But he kept trying.
"But the problem is," he insisted,
"I'm not ready yet. Look at me, Jancy.
I'm just a kid." He shrugged and
screwed up his face in the kind of
lopsided smile that an actor uses to
show he's joking—mostly joking,
anyway. "Well okay, a supersmart and
talented person, maybe, but still just a
twelve-year-old kid." He was kidding,
but not entirely. He was pretty smart, all
right. No Baggett, not even the ones who
put him down as a smart aleck and
teacher's pet, could deny that.
And as for talented? Well, according
to Miss Scott . . . But that was another
story. The only story he had to come up
with right now was one that would keep
Jancy from running away. At least for a
few more years.
"The kind of help you'd need for a
successful getaway," he told her, "is
somebody with a lot more than just
smarts. Like, what you're going to need
is some big, musclebound type guy."
Trying for a laugh—Jancy usually
liked comedy—he stuck out his skinny
chest and flexed invisible muscles.
No laugh. Jancy listened, squinty
eyed and silent. He sighed. Even though
she'd known about his running-away
plan for a long time, she also knew, or
should have, that he'd always seen it as
something that was going to happen in
the fairly distant future. And now,
suddenly, it was like right this minute?
Things were moving way too fast. It
wasn't more than an hour since the
Sweetie Pie tragedy, and now Jancy was
jumping the gun by announcing that she'd
never been cut out to be a Baggett, and
she was going to prove it by running
away.
"Okay. Running away to where?"
William asked. "Where you planning to
go?"
Jancy raised her head and jutted her
small pointed chin. "To Gold Beach,"
she said firmly. "I'm going to go to Gold
Beach to live with our aunt Fiona."
William shook his head doubtfully. "I
wouldn't count on it," he said. Fiona
Hardison, their mother's sister, was a
schoolteacher who lived in a little town
on the northern California coast. A
woman whom William and Jancy had
met only once, right after their mother
died, and that was four long years ago.
"What makes you think Aunt Fiona
would let you live with her?" William
asked.
"Oh, she will," Jancy said. "She'll be
so happy to get Trixie and Buddy back,
she'll be glad to have you and me, too."
And that was how Jancy finally got
around to mentioning an important minor
detail. Not only would William and
Jancy be running away together—they
were going to be taking Trixie and
Buddy with them.
CHAPTER
2
nder the circumstances,
Jancy's decision to give up on being a
Baggett wasn't all that surprising. After
all, she'd probably loved poor old
Sweetie Pie more than any Baggett,
except possibly William himself—and
the two little kids, of course.
That was another thing about Jancy.
She'd liked little things, the littler the
better. Not that William, who was
actually a year and a half older and a
couple of inches taller than she was,
could play that role very well. He
wasn't really little, but according to
popular opinion (Baggett opinion
anyway), pretty much of a wimp. So
maybe that's what made the difference
with Jancy. William was aware that little
and cute was way out ahead where Jancy
was concerned, but skinny and wimpy
might come in a close second.
That day in the hayloft, William's
arguments got even more frantic after
Jancy mentioned that her escape plan
included Trixie and Buddy. "Holy
Toledo, Jancy," he said, when she let
that minor detail slip out. "You can't be
serious. And tell you right now that I am
very serious about not helping commit a
double kidnapping. You know what they
do to kidnappers when they catch them.
Like that guy who stole the Lindbergh
baby. Zap!" He did an exaggerated
quivering, stiff-limbed impression of an
electric chair victim. Still no smile. He
shrugged. "Anyway, I mean it. Count me
out."
"But you told me—," Jancy was
beginning when he interrupted.
"Okay, so I did say I was going to
clear out, and I meant it. But I meant
later. Like when I'm practically an adult.
Like fourteen or fifteen. Not now, when I
won't even be thirteen till next month.
And as for you getting those two little
kids all the way to Gold Beach? No
way. Doing it all by yourself? I mean,
look at you."
She did, and William did too. There
she was, barely eleven years old, and
small for her age. And at the moment—it
was a blazing hot day—wearing one of
Babe's outgrown sundresses. On Babe,
who was fifteen, the dress had looked—
well, kind of sexy, in a not very classy
way. But on Jancy's skinny little stick of
a body, it only made her look like the
wrong end of a hard winter.
With the hay fever kicking in pretty
badly, William had to stop to sneeze
several times before he went on. "So I'm
supposed to believe that what I'm
looking at right this minute is a
dangerous kidnapper who's going to nab
two little kids and get them all the way
to Gold Beach without getting caught?
More than a hundred miles from here?
And even if you managed to get that far
before the police caught up with you,
what makes you think Aunt Fiona would
let you stay? She didn't even answer the
last time you wrote to her."
"I know," Jancy said. "But she did
write me two letters that were all about
how awful bad she felt when Big Ed
took Buddy and Trixie away. Like how
she'd had them and loved them for two
years and would have kept them forever
if Big Ed hadn't showed up all of a
sudden to take them back."
"Yeah, I know," William said. "I
remember." What he knew, and would
never forget, was that right after Buddy
was born, their mother, Laura Hardison
Baggett, died. Died very suddenly,
leaving behind newborn Buddy and twoyear-old
Trixie to be taken care of by
Big Ed and a bunch of Baggett teenagers.
William had been eight years old at the
time, and he remembered that final scene
all too well. Especially when he was
trying not to.
Back then Big Ed had been glad to let
Aunt Fiona take Buddy and Trixie away
to live with her. Let them go probably
because there was no longer any Baggett
left alive who was willing and able to
change diapers. William had been
willing to try, and he'd said so, but
nobody would listen to him. So the two
youngest Baggetts went to live with their
mother's sister, who kept them for two
years before Big Ed decided to take
them back.
That happened right after he'd
married Gertie, his third wife. What Big
Ed told the welfare people was that he
took the two little kids back because
Gertie wanted to be a mother to them. As
far as William could see, Gertie wasn't,
and never had been, the least bit
interested in being a mother to anyone.
The way William figured, it was a lot
more likely that President Roosevelt's
new welfare plan had something to do
with Big Ed's decision to have all his
kids under the same roof. The New Deal
plan that gave really poor families a
certain amount of money for each of their
children.
"Aunt Fiona probably didn't answer
your letter," William told Jancy,
"because she was sure that if she got
them back, Big Ed would just show up
and grab them away again."
"I know." Jancy hung her head so that
a bunch of her thick, streaky-blond hair
swung down, hiding her small face.
Jancy got teased about her hair—got
called Mop Head and Rabbit Tail and
even worse names. Actually, William
thought her curly hair was her best
feature, at least when it was clean and
combed, which wasn't all that often.
He'd told her so before, but now he said
nothing at all, and after a while she said,
"I know" again, in a faint weepy voice.
"But I am leaving, for absolute sure and
certain, and I just can't leave the poor
little things here all alone."
"Humph!" William snorted. "All
alone? Not hardly. Even with you gone,
and maybe me too, that still leaves—
let's see." He pretended to count on his
fingers. "Seven"—he stopped to sneeze
—"that leaves eight big Baggetts, if you
count Gertie."
"Yeah, exactly," Jancy said. "That's
exactly why I can't leave Trixie and
Buddy here."
William got her point, and he couldn't
help but agree, but just then another
thought hit him. "I don't get it. What I
don't get is why you'd want to bother
with them. Well, Trixie maybe." He
could sort of understand that. Trixie was
kind of hard to resist. "But Buddy? I
mean, wasn't he the one who flushed the
toilet?"
Her face still hidden by her hair,
Jancy nodded. "I know," she kind of
gasped. And when she went on, her
voice sounded wobbly. "But it wasn't
his fault. Not really. Al, or else it was
Andy—Buddy never can tell them apart
—told him that a toilet is just the right
size for a guinea pig bathtub, and when
you flush, it's just like a guinea pig
washing machine. It was that crummy
twin's fault. I know it was awful dumb
of Buddy to believe him, but he's only
four years old. And who's going to tell
him what else to not believe after both of
us leave?"
William could tell she was crying by
the sound of her voice, even though a
heavy hunk of hair was hiding her face.
"Crying won't do any good," he said.
But of course it did. After a few
minutes of listening to her sobs and
watching her skinny little shoulders
shaking and quivering, he sighed and
said, "Okay, okay.I'll think about it."
And he meant it, even though it didn't
take much thought to figure out that one
reason, even the main reason, that Jancy
wanted him to run away too was because
she knew about—
"Oh thank you, thank you, William."
Jancy interrupted his suspicious
musings. And then her special talent for
mind reading—at least where William
was concerned—kicked in. "And it's not
either because of your money," she said.
"All that money in your running-away
piggy bank."
William's snort was even louder.
"My Getaway Fund is not in a piggy
bank," he said.
"Well, whatever you keep it in,"
Jancy said quickly. "It's not because of
your money. It's because you don't
belong here either. You're not like the
rest of them. You're not nearly as mean,
and ever so much smarter and . . . "
William didn't have to listen to know
the rest of what Jancy had to say. He'd
heard her say it before when she wanted
to get something out of him. But he also
felt pretty sure that she said it because
she knew it was true—at least the part
about being smarter. But he still had a
strong suspicion that his running-away
money had a lot to do with it.
He shrugged. "Well, okay then, maybe
I'm in. So what are your plans? I mean
like when—and how?"
"When?" Jancy's smile, still tear wet,
was wide and beaming. "Well, as soon
as ever I can. Tomorrow or else the next
day, for sure." She nodded again, so
hard her curly mop bounced up and
down. "Not a minute later."
"Ookaaay," William drawled the
word out slowly. "But then comes how.
How are you going to do it?"
"Well," Jancy's big eyes rolled
thoughtfully. "I guess I'll just . . . " Her
voice trailed off to a whisper and then
came slowly back. "Well, I'll just pack
up all their clothes"—long pause—"and
something to eat on the way, and
then . . . "
"Yeah," William prompted. "And
then?"
Jancy's bony little face widened into
a wobbly smile. "And then you'll decide
what to do. You will, won't you,
William?"
William shoved to the back of his
mind a lot of troublesome unanswered
questions concerning such things as how
and when, and the even more serious one
about what Aunt Fiona's reaction might
be to their unannounced arrival. He
sneezed again, wiped his nose on his
sleeve, sighed, and said, "Yeah. Well,
sort of looks like I'll have to."