
Mrs. Eva Marie Olinski always gave good answers. 

Whenever she was asked how she had selected 
her team for the Academic Bowl, she chose one 
of several good answers. Most often she said that the four 
members of her team had skills that balanced one another. 
That was reasonable. Sometimes she said that she knew her 
team would practice. That was accurate. To the district su- 
perintendent of schools, she gave a bad answer, but she did 
that only once, only to him, and if that answer was not 
good, her reason for giving it was. 

The fact was that Mrs. Olinski did not know how she 
had chosen her team, and the further fact was that she didn't 
know that she didn't know until she did know. Of course, 
that is true of most things: you do not know up to and in- 
cluding the very last second before you do. And for Mrs. 
Olinski that was not until Bowl Day was over and so was the 
work of her four sixth graders. 

They called themselves The Souls. They told Mrs. 
Olinski that they were The Souls long before they were a 
team, but she told them that they were a team as soon as 
they became The Souls. Then after a while, teacher and 
team agreed that they were arguing chicken -or-egg. 


Whichever way it began— chicken-or-egg, team-or-The 
Souls— it definitely ended with an egg. Definitely, an egg. 

People still remark about how extraordinary it was to 
have four sixth graders make it to the finals. There had been 
a few seventh graders scattered among the other teams, 
but all the rest of the middle school regional champs were 
eighth graders. Epiphany had never before won even the 
local championship, and there they were, up on stage, ready 
to compete for the state trophy. All four members of 
Maxwell, the other team in the final round, were in the 
eighth grade. Both of the Maxwell boys' voices had deep- 
ened, and the girls displayed lacy bra straps inside their 
T-shirt necklines. The fact that the necklines were out- 
sized and that the two pairs of straps matched— they were 
apricot-colored— made Mrs. Olinski believe that they 
were not making a fashion statement as much as they were 
saying something. To her four sixth graders puberty 
was something they could spell and define but had yet 
to experience. 

Unlike football bowls, there had been no season tallies 
for the academic teams. There had been no best-of-five. 
Each contest had been an elimination round. There were 
winners, and there were losers. From the start, the rule was: 
Lose one game, and you are out. 

 

So it was on Bowl Day. 

At the start of the day, there had been eight re- 
gional champs. Now there were two— Epiphany 
and Maxwell. 


It was afternoon by the time they got to the last 
round, and Mrs. Olinski sat shivering in a windowless 
room in a building big enough and official enough to 
have its own zip code. This was Albany, the capital of 
the state of New York, This was the last Saturday in 
May, and some robot— human or electronic— had 
checked the calendar instead of the weather report 
and had turned on the air-conditioning. Like everyone 
else in the audience, Mrs. Olinski wore a short-sleeved 
T-shirt with her team's logo across the front. Maxwell's 
were navy,- Epiphany's were red and were as loud as 
things were permitted to get in that large, cold room. 
The audience had been asked not to whistle, cheer, 
stomp, hold up signs, wave banners, or even applaud. 
They were reminded that this Bowl was for brains, not 
brawn, and decorum— something between chapel and 
classroom— was the order of the day. 

Epiphany sat on one side of a long table,- Maxwell, 
the other. At a lectern between them stood the com- 
missioner of education of the state of New York. He 
smiled benevolently over the audience as he reached 
inside his inner breast pocket and withdrew a pair of 
reading glasses. With a flick of his wrist he opened 
them and put them on. 

Mrs. Olinski hugged her upper arms and won- 
dered if maybe it was nerves and not the quartering 
wind blowing from the ceiling vents that was causing 
her shivers. She watched with bated (and visible) 
breath as the commissioner placed his hand into a 
large clear glass bowl. His college class ring knocked 
bottom. (Had the room been two degrees colder, the 
glass would have shattered.) He withdrew a piece of paper, unfolded it, and read, "What is the meaning of 
the word calligraphy and from what language does it 
derive?" 

A buzzer sounded. 

Mrs. Olinski knew whose it was. She was sure of 
it. She leaned back and relaxed. She was not nervous. 
Excited, yes. Nervous, no. 

The television lights glanced off Noah Gershom's 
glasses. He had been the first chosen. 


My mother insisted that 1 write a B & B letter to my 
grandparents. 1 told her that I could not write a B & B letter, 
and she asked me why, and 1 told her that 1 did not know 
what a B & B letter was. She explained— not too patiently— 
that a B & B letter is a bread and butter letter you write to 
people to thank them for having you as their houseguest. I 
told her that I was taught never to use the word you are 
defining in its definition and that she ought to think of a 
substitute word for letter if she is defining it. Mother then 
made a remark about how Western Civilization was in a de- 
cline because people of my generation knew how to nitpick 
but not how to write a B & B letter. 

I told her that, with all due respect, I did not think I 
owed Grandma and Grandpa a B & B. And then 1 stated my 
case. Fact: I was not just a houseguest, I was family,- and fact: 
I had not been their houseguest by choice because fact: She 
had sent me to them because she had won a cruise for sell- 
ing more houses in Epiphany than anyone else in the world 
and if she had shared her cruise with Joey and me instead of 
with her husband, my father, I would not have been sent to 
Florida in the first place and fact: She, not me, owed them 
thanks,- and further fact: 1 had been such a wonderful help 


while I was there that Grandma and Grandpa would proba- 
bly want to write me a B & B. 

My brother Joey had been sent to my other set of grand- 
parents, who live in a normal suburb in Connecticut. "Is 
Joey writing a B & B to Grandma and Grandpa Eberle?" 

"Even as we speak," Mother replied. 

"Well, maybe he has something to be thankful for," 
I said. 

Mother drew in her breath as if she were about to say 
something else about what children of my generation were 
doing to Western Civilization, but instead, she said, "Write," 
and closed my bedroom door behind her. I opened the door 
and called out to her, "Can I use the computer?" 

She said, "I know you can use the computer, Noah, but 
you may not." I was about to make a remark about who was 
nitpicking now, but Mother gave me such a negative look 
that I knew any thoughts I had had better be about bread 
and butter and not nitpicking. 

I gazed at my closed bedroom door and then out the 
window. Door. Window. Door. Window. There was no es- 
cape. 

I took a box of notepaper out of my desk drawer. The 
notes were bigger than postage stamps, but not by much. 1 
took out a ballpoint pen and started pressing it against a 
piece of scrap paper, making dents in the paper but not 
making a mark. Ballpoint pens sometimes take a while to get 
started. When I was down in Florida, Tillie Nachman had 
said, "The ballpoint pen has been the biggest single factor 
in the decline of Western Civilization. It makes the written 
word cheap, fast, and totally without character." My mother 
and Tillie should get together. Between them, they have 


come up with the two major reasons why Western 
Civilization is about to collapse. 

Not because 1 was trying to save Western Civilization 
but because I wanted to actually get my B & B letter written, 
I put the ballpoint pen back into the drawer and took out 
my calligraphy pen, the one that uses wet ink. I didn't fill it. 
I would fill it when I was ready to write. I also took out a 
sharpened pencil and a pad of Post-it notes to jot down any 
ideas that might come to mind. 

I wrote red wagon. The red wagon had definitely been a 
gift— even though, under the circumstances, I didn't bring it 
back to Epiphany with me. I thought a while longer and 
wrote tuxedo T-shirt. It, too, had been a gift, but 1 didn't have 
that either. I wrote calligraphy pen and bottle of ink. A wet ink 
pen and a bottle of ink had been given to me, but the ones 
I took out of my desk drawer were ones I had bought my- 
self. The calligraphy pen made me remember about the 
Post-it notes I had bought to correct the problem that had 
developed with the ink. Even though I had bought the Post- 
it notes myself, I added Post-it notes to my list. I peeled off the 
Post-it note containing my list and stuck it on the wall in 
front of my desk, and then, as my mother had commanded, 
I thought again. 

Century Village where my Gershom grandparents live is 
not like any place I had ever been to. It is in Florida, but it 
is not exactly Disney World or Sea World or other regular 
destinations. It is like a theme park for old people. Almost 
everyone who lives there is retired from useful life. 
Grandma Sadie and Grandpa Nate fit in nicely. 

It all started when Margaret Draper and Izzy Diamondstein decided to get married, and the citizens of Century Village 
called a meeting in the clubhouse to organize the wedding. 

In their former lives, Grandma Sadie and Grandpa Nate 
had owned a small bakery right here in Epiphany, New 
York, so Grandma volunteered to do the wedding cake, and 
Grandpa Nate, whose chief hobby had always been violin 
playing, promised to arrange for the music. 

My grandfather Gershom began practicing immediately 
and often. Grandma Sadie said, "Nathan, how can you stand 
playing the same piece over and over again?" And Grandpa 
Nate answered, "Why don't you ask me how 1 can stand 
making love to the same woman over and over again?" And 
even though she is the age she is, my grandmother blushed 
and said, Sbal a shanda far die kinder, a remark I had heard 
many times before Grandma and Grandpa moved to 
Century Village. Translated it means, "Hush up, it's a shame 
for the children,” but what it really meant was that Grandpa 
was embarrassing Grandma. 

Mr. Cantor, a retired postman from Pennsylvania, who 
was devoted to growing orchids, said that he would have 
enough blossoms for the corsages. And Mrs. Kerchmer said 
that she would lend her African violets for the centerpieces. 

Tillie Nachman volunteered to do the invitations, and 
Rabbi Friedman, who was a rabbi in his former life, said he 
would perform the ceremony even though Margaret Draper 
was not Jewish and Izzy Diamondstein was. This was a late 
second marriage, and there wouldn't be any concern about 
what religion they should choose for their children since all 
their children were already grown up and chosen. Grandpa 
Nate later explained to me that unlike the average citizen of 
Century Village, rabbis don't have former lives. They are 
what they were,- once a rabbi, always a rabbi. 


Many citizens of Century Village were widows who had 
once been great family cooks, so they formed a committee 
to plan the wedding dinner. Everyone agreed to share the 
cost, and they made up a menu and a master shopping list. 

After that first meeting, Grandpa Nate and I took Tillie 
Nachman, a former New York City person who had never 
learned to drive, to the stationery store so that she could 
buy the invitations. While she shopped for the invitations, 
Grandpa and I went to Wal-Mart to pick up Grandma's pre- 
scription, and that is when we saw the red wagon special. 
Grandpa bought it for me, and it's a good thing he did. It 
came in handy until Allen came along. 

I checked my list. Post-it notes. I had bought them when 
we ran out of invitations. Of course, we didn't ran out of in- 
vitations until Tillie's cat got its paws into the ink. 

Tillie was filling in the wbo-wbat-wben-and-where on the in- 
vitations when I noticed that she had the prettiest hand- 
writing I had ever seen. "Calligraphy," she said. "It means 
beautiful writing," and she asked me if I would like to learn 
how to write like her. I said yes. She said she would give me 
lessons if I would help her address the envelopes. So 
Grandpa drove us to an art supply store where she bought 
me a calligraphy pen and a bottle of ink. It was while Tillie 
was trying out various pen points (called nibs ) that she made 
the remark about the ballpoint pen being the biggest single 
factor in the decline of Western Civilization. 

After choosing a nib Tillie said, 'T hope in the future, 
Noah, that you will use a ballpoint pen only when you have 
to press hard to make multiple carbons.” 

I couldn't promise that. There were times in school 



when a person had to do things fast, cheap, and without 
character. 

Tillie said, 'There are pens that come with ink in a car- 
tridge, Noah, but I will have nothing to do with them." So 
when we were back at her condo, Tillie taught me how to 
fill a pen, or, as she said, "How to properly fill a pen." 

One; Turn the filling plunger counterclockwise as far as 
it will go. Two: Dip the nib completely into the ink. Three; 
Turn the filling plunger clockwise until it stops. Four: Hold 
the nib above the ink bottle and turn the plunger counter- 
clockwise again until three drops of ink fall back into the 
bottle. Five: Turn the plunger clockwise to stop the drops. 
Six: Wipe the excess ink completely from pen and nib. 

When I told Tillie that six steps seemed a lot to have to 
do before you begin, she said, "You must think of those six 
steps not as preparation for the beginning but as the begin- 
ning itself." 

I practiced my calligraphy. I practiced all twenty-six let- 
ters of the alphabet, including X, which was not part of any 
of the who-what-when-and-wheres or any of the addresses 
but is a very good letter to practice because fact: It is not 
easy. 

When Tillie decided that I was good enough to help 
with the invitations, I sat on the floor of her living room and 
used her coffee table as my desk. She sat at the kitchen 
table. Fact: Many of the domiciles in Century Village do not 
have family rooms with desks. 

There was a lot of writing to do because at the bottom 
of each and every one of those invitations, we wrote: Your 
presence but no presents. Tillie said that practically all the 
invitations that went out from Century Village said that. 


"Besides," she said, "I think that making the wedding is 
enough of a present." 

I was doing a wonderful job until Thomas Stearns, 
called T. S., Tillie's cat, pounced into my lap, and I jumped 
up and spilled the ink, and the cat walked through the 
spilled ink and onto a couple of the invitations I was ad- 
dressing. A few— five altogether— now had cat's paws. 

Tillie was pretty upset because she had not bought extras 
because she said, "I don't make mistakes." In her former life 
Tillie had been a bookkeeper. I heard her say, "I can add up 
a column of figures with the best of them." I didn't know if 
she meant the best of the computers or the best of the book- 
keepers, and I didn't ask because I was afraid I already knew. 

I told Tillie not to worry. I told her that I would think of 
something. And I did. That's when I bought the Post-it 
notes. I put a Post-it into each of the invitations that had a 
cat's paw mark. On the Post-it I wrote (in faultless calligra- 
phy): Bring this specially marked invitation to the wedding 
and receive a surprise gift. When Tillie asked me what the 
surprise would be, I told her not to worry, that I would think 
of something. And I did. But fact: It wasn't easy. 

On the day the groceries were to be purchased, the cit- 
izens of Century Village formed their version of the Home 
Shopping Network. They met in the clubhouse again. 
Everyone sat in rows, holding coupons they'd clipped since 
printing began. They asked me to be master of ceremonies. 

I sat at a table in front of the clubhouse room and called 
out items from the master grocery list. It was a lot like a 
game of Go Fish. I said, "I need one Crisco, four margarines, 
pareve, and let's have all your paper towels." Everyone 




searched through their fistfuls of coupons and gave me the 
ones that were needed. Tillie circled the items we had 
coupons for. 

Then we checked the newspaper for supermarket spe- 
cials and made out lists for each of the stores, depending on 
which one had the best buy in a particular item. I wrote the 
Gershom list in calligraphy. It didn't slow things down too 
much, and the citizens of Century Village are accustomed 
to waiting. 

Later that day, everyone returned to the clubhouse with 
the groceries and the store receipts. Tillie added, divided, 
and straightened out who owed and who was owed, and no 
one bothered to check because everyone knew that Tillie 
Nachman did not make mistakes. Then we had to check the 
grocery list against the menu and who was cooking what. I 
helped distribute the groceries to the proper households, 
using the new red wagon. 

Fact: I did a wonderful job. 

On the day of the wedding I was in great demand to 
take things over to the clubhouse in my wagon. The African 
violets alone took three trips, and the briskets took two. 
Next, Mr. Cantor and I delivered the orchid corsages to the 
bride and her maid of honor. In the real world, I had never 
met anyone who spent as much time with flowers as Mr. 
Cantor. Mrs. Draper's maid of honor was to be her daugh- 
ter, Mrs. Potter. Mrs. Draper used to live in my hometown, 
which is Epiphany, New York, and her daughter, Mrs. 
Potter, still does. Mrs. Potter bought a new dress and flew 
down for the wedding, but we didn't fly down together. I 
had come weeks before— my first trip as an unaccompanied 
minor. 


Mr. Cantor and I took flowers over to the groom and his 
best man to put in their buttonholes. Allen, who was Izzy 
Diamondstein's son, was to be best man. They both live in 
Florida and have the same last name. 

Allen Diamondstein still lived in the real world because 
even though he was Izzy's child and even though he was 
full-grown, he was too young to live in Century Village. 
Fact: Allen Diamondstein was the most nervous human 
being l have ever seen in my entire life. Fact: His wife had 
left him. She had moved to Epiphany and taken a job with 
my father, who is the best dentist in town (fact). 

Allen Diamondstein kept saying, "Isn't it ironic? My fa- 
ther is getting married just as I am getting divorced." This 
was not the greatest conversation starter in the world. No 
one knew what to say after he said it. Some cleared their 
throats and said nothing. Others cleared their throats and 
changed the subject. 

I must have heard him say it a dozen times, and 1 never 
knew what to say either. At first I wondered if that was be- 
cause I didn't know the meaning of ironic. So I looked it up. 

The meaning that best fits (and does not use the same 
word in its definition) is "the contrast between what you ex- 
pect to happen and what really happens." But after I looked 
it up, I couldn't figure out what was ironic about Allen 
Diamondstein's getting divorced and Izzy Diamondstein's 
getting married. The way Allen Diamondstein acted, I can 
tell you that divorce would be the only possible thing you 
could expect from marriage to him. And the way Izzy acted 
around Margaret, marriage would not only be expected, it 
would be necessary. Sbai a shandafar die kinder. They were em- 
barrassing to watch, but not so embarrassing that I didn't. 




Wedding cakes are not baked as much as they are built. 
In the real world, people don't build wedding cakes. They 
order in. If you are going to build it yourself, it is not done 
in a day. It takes three. On the first day, Grandma Sadie 
baked the layers. On the second, she constructed the cake, 
using cardboard bases and straws for supports, and made the 
basic icing to cover the layers. On the third day, she made 
the designer icing for the rosebuds and put the little bride 
and groom on top. Fact: The cake was beautiful. 

Fortunately, Grandpa Nate took its picture right after 
she finished it, so Grandma Sadie can remember how it 
looked for a little while. 

Allen Diamondstein would tell you that the red wagon 
was the problem, but I would say that it's ironic that he 
should say so. It definitely wasn’t. He was. How else were 
we supposed to deliver the cake to the clubhouse? It was too 
tall to fit in the trunk of the car, and since on an average day 
the outside temperature in Century Village is body temper- 
ature, there would be a major meltdown before the cake got 
to the clubhouse where the wedding was to take place. 
That's when I got the idea to load up the wagon with ice, 
put a sheet of plastic over the ice, put the cake on top of 
that, and slowly wheel it over there, with me pulling and 
Grandpa checking the rear. 

Grandpa Nate went to the Jiffy store and bought three 
bags of ice, and we loaded them into the wagon. Too much. 
Since we didn't want the bed of the wagon filled right up to 
the edge, we emptied some, dumping it out on the cement 
of the patio. That's where we were going to load the wagon 
so we wouldn't have to wheel the wagon down any steps to 
get it to the meeting room. 

Just after we loaded the cake onto the wagon, Allen 


Diamondstein came over to Grandma's. He said his father 
wanted him to pick up a prayer book, but I think his father 
sent him because he was making the groom nervous. 

No one answered when he rang the front doorbell 
because we were all in the back loading the cake into the 
red wagon, so he walked around back to the patio. 
Unfortunately, he didn't see the wagon handle, so he 
tripped on it, slid on the wet concrete, fell in the puddle of 
melted ice and, unfortunately, toppled the wedding cake. 

The little top layer was totally smashed; it fell in the 
same puddle as Allen, and the little bride and groom were 
seriously maimed. 

So was Allen's ankle. Which fact 1 detected when he 
grabbed his foot and started to moan while still sitting in the 
puddle on the patio. Grandpa Nate called 911. Grandma 
Sadie returned to the kitchen to whip up a repair batch of 
icing. Grandpa Nate took the remains of the cake to the 
clubhouse, and I sat with Allen until the ambulance came. 
He was not good company. 

The groom called to see what was taking Allen so long. 
I answered the phone, and I thought I would have to call 
91 1 for him, too. “Don't panic," I said. "I'll be your best 
man." 

I did not tell Izzy what had happened to the couple on 
top of the wedding cake because people get very supersti- 
tious at weddings and no one wants a wounded bride and 
groom sitting on top of the cake with which they are to start 
a happy marriage. I had seen that sort of thing often enough 
in the movies: A close-up of the shattered little bride and 
groom floating in a puddle of melted ice signifying the fate 
of the real bride and groom. So although 1 had to tell Izzy 
Diamondstein what had happened to Allen, I didn't say a 



word about the top of the wedding cake. I didn't think I 
could convince him that having the little bride and groom 
fall into a puddle was ironic. 

He seemed to calm down when I volunteered to be best 
man, which was about the same time that we found out from 
the ambulance driver that Allen would be back at Century 
Village in time for the wedding even if he probably wouldn't 
be able to walk down the aisle. 

As soon as the ambulance took Allen away, I ran over to 
Mr. Cantors place and asked him to please, please find an- 
other orchid for the top of the cake although it would be 
better if he could find two since the second layer was now 
the top layer and was bigger. Mr. Cantor found two beauti- 
ful sprays of orchids, which Grandma Sadie artistically 
arranged around the new top layer. 

Since I had promised to be best man, not having a tux 
was a problem. 1 couldn't fit in Allen's, not that I would have 
wanted to if I could. That's when Grandpa Nate called Bella 
Dubinsky. 

In her former life, Bella had been an artist. She painted 
the pictures that went into the pattern books for people 
who sew their own clothes. In the real world I had never 
met anyone who sewed her own clothes, but in Century 
Village, 1 had met three. Bella had a supply of fabric paints, 
and within two hours, we had painted a T-shirt that looked 
like a tuxedo with a red bow tie. I say we because I helped 
color in the lines she drew. It's not easy filling in the lines on 
T-shirt material,- it scrunches up under the weight of the 
brush, leaving skip marks. You have to go over it again and 
again. Fortunately, the paints dry fast, and by four o'clock, 
it was ready to wear. 


Repaired, the wedding cake looked beautiful. If Allen 
had not told, no one would have guessed that those orchids 
didn't belong on top. But Allen told. He told everyone. He 
also apologized for my being best man. I didn't think that I 
was someone he had to apologize for. I had helped a lot, 
and I looked totally presentable in my tuxedo T-shirt, which 
was a real work of art. 

Fact: Being best man is not hard. You walk down the 
aisle with the maid of honor. Who, in this case, was a ma- 
tron of honor because she is married. 1 admit that having the 
son of the groom, Allen, as best man would have been a bet- 
ter match, size-wise, for the daughter of the bride even 
though one is married and the other divorced, but the es- 
sential fact is that I did a very good job. I stood beside the 
groom. Mrs. Potter stood beside the bride, and the four of 
us stood in front of the rabbi, and all five of us stood under 
the bridal canopy, which I know is called a c hupab and which 
I think is spelled the way I spelled it. I didn't yawn, sneeze, 
or scratch any visible thing. I held the wedding ring until 
the rabbi nodded, and I handed it over. 

I did an excellent job of being best man even though 
when I was under the chupah, I was under a lot of pressure 
trying to think of surprises for the cat's paw invitations. The 
idea came to me at the very moment Izzy smashed the glass 
and everyone yelled mazel tow. Even before Izzy stopped kiss- 
ing the bride, I knew what I could do. (Fact: It was a very 
long and thorough kiss.) 

It wouldn't be easy. It would mean giving up things I 
loved, but I had to do it. 

When everyone except Allen was dancing the bora, I 
slipped out of the clubhouse and ran back to Grandma 
Sadie's. I took off my tuxedo T-shirt, folded it nicely, and 



put it in my red wagon. I found the package of Post-it notes, 
my calligraphy pen, and bottle of ink and after making sure 
that the ink was tightly closed, I put those in the wagon, 
too. When I returned to the wedding party, the dance was 
over, and everyone was sitting around looking exhausted. 
My moment had arrived. 

I tapped a glass with a spoon as I had seen grown-ups do, 
and I said, "Ladies and gentlemen, will those lucky few who 
have the specially marked invitations, please come forward. 
It is time to choose your surprise gift." I saw them pick up 
their cat's-paw invitations and walk over to the band where I 
was standing beside my red wagon. "First," I said, "we have 
one hand-painted T-shirt, which is an original work of art 
done by Mrs. Bella Dubinsky. In addition, we have a callig- 
raphy pen, almost new, and a bottle of ink, almost full. These 
are the perfect instruments for beautiful handwriting. We 
have one packet of Post-it notes, complete except for five.” I 
swallowed hard and added, "And we have one red wagon." 

Tillie Nachman, who could count precisely, said, "But 
that's only four gifts, and there were five cat's-paw invita- 
tions." 

"Oh, yes," I said, "the fifth gift is the best gift of all." 

Everyone asked at once, Whatisit? Wbatisit ? Wbatisit? 

I sucked in my breath until my lungs felt like twin diri- 
gibles inside my ribs. "The best gift of all is ... the very 
best ... the very best gift of all is ... to give up your gift." 

A thick silence fell over the room. Then Tillie Nachman 
started clapping. Soon the others joined in, and I noticed 
Grandma Sadie and Grandpa Nate looking proud. 

At first everyone who held a cat's-paw invitation wanted 
to be the one to give up his gift, but I did not want that. If 


they didn't take my presents, I would feel as if they didn't 
matter. Mr. Cantor stepped forward and took the Post-it 
notes. He said he could use them for labeling his plants. He 
said that he was donating an orchid plant as the fifth gift. 
Then Tillie promised calligraphy lessons to the person who 
took the pen and ink, and Bella promised fabric painting 
lessons to the person who took the tuxedo T-shirt. In that 
way each of my gifts kept on giving. 

Four cat's-paw gifts were now taken. 

Only the red wagon remained. Guess who had the fifth 
cat's-paw invitation? 

Allen, the son of. 

Allen said he didn't want the little red wagon. He said 
that he had no use for a wagon in the real world where he 
was an accountant. 

When Izzy, the groom, rose from the table to make a 
toast, he lifted his glass of wine and said, "Margy and I want 
to thank all our friends in Century Village. We don't know 
if we can ever thank you enough for giving our life together 
this wonderful start. As you know, Margy and I have pooled 
our resources and bought a little condo on the ocean. Not 
exactly on the ocean. It is, after all, a high-rise. We will miss 
the community life here, but we don't want to miss our 
friends. We'll visit. We want you to visit us. Our welcome 
mat is out. Always. We leave many memories behind. And 
we are also leaving this little red wagon. Every time you use 
it, please think of this happy occasion." 

Izzy started to sit down, but halfway he got up again 
and added, "Consider it a gift to everyone from the best 
man." He never said which best man he meant, but I'm 
pretty sure he meant me. 





Now back in the real world, I sat at my desk and crossed 
every single item off the list. I didn't have the wagon, the 
Post-it notes, the T-shirt that Bella Dubinsky had designed, 
or the pen and ink that Tillie Nachman had bought me. I did 
have a new pad of Post-it notes and a new calligraphy pen— 
both of which I had bought with my own money when I got 
back to Epiphany. 

I never had to write a B & B letter when we stayed at 
Disney World or Sea World. Of course. Century Village is 
not exactly Disney World or Sea World either. Century 
Village is not like any other place in Western Civilization. 
It is not like any other place in the entire world. 

I picked up my pen and filled it properly, the six-step 
process that Tillie had taught me. She had said, 'You must 
think of those six steps not as preparation for the beginning 
but as the beginning itself." I knew then that I had started 
my B & B. I let my pen drink up a whole plunger full of ink 
and then holding the pen over the bottle, I squeezed three 
drops back into the bottle. 

And I thought— a B & B letter is giving just a few drops 
back to the bottle. I put away the tiny notepad and took out 
a full sheet of calligraphy paper and began, 

Dear Grandma Sadie and Grandpa Nate, 

Thank you for a vacation that was out 
of this world ... 


 

T he contest had warmed up, and so had 
Mrs. Olinski. From her seat on the aisle she 
waited. 

On her left sat Dr. Roy Clayton Rohmer, the District 
Superintendent for Clarion County. Both Dr. Rohmer 
and Mrs. Olinski paid strict attention to the commis- 
sioner, the man at the podium. There could be no 
mistake: This was the man of the hour, king for the day. 

He wore a navy blue, precision fit pin-striped suit 
and a white-on-dazzling-white shirt. An edge of his 
French cuffs showed beneath his jacket sleeves. Mrs. 
Olinski was not sure how much the correct amount 
was, but she knew that if she put a spirit-level to his, 
they would be exactly right. The French cuffs were 
held together with onyx cuff links, and his collar was 
tied with a red-striped power necktie. The television 
lights beamed down on his crown of hair, which was 
tinted the color of peach pits. He was dressed, brushed, 
coiffed, and blow-dried not just to be seen but to be 
looked at. 


20 


21 



Dr. Rohmer could not, would not take his eyes off 
the man at the podium, and Mrs. Olinski thought of 
Alice in Wonderland. "Don't look at me like that!" said the 
King to the Cheshire Cat. "A cat may look at a king," 
said Alice. Mrs. Olinski wanted to tell Dr. Rohmer 
that a cat may look at a king. But why bother? The au- 
dience was not permitted to speak. 

 

After The Souls had won the Epiphany Middle School 
championship, Dr. Roy Clayton Rohmer paid a visit to Mrs. 
Olinski and asked— guess what?— why had she chosen this 
team. She still did not know (and wouldn't until after it was 
all over), but by that time the success of The Souls (even if 
she did not yet know that they were The Souls) had made 
Mrs. Olinski less timid. 

Dr. Rohmer had announced that he had just completed 
a three- day workshop on multiculturalism for ed-you-kay- 
toars. Mrs. Olinski had always been amused by educators 
who called themselves ed-you-kay-toars. So, when he asked 
her how she had chosen the four members of her academic 
team, Mrs. Olinski knitted her brow and answered with 
hushed seriousness. "In the interest of diversity," she said, "I 
chose a brunette, a redhead, a blond, and a kid with hair as 
black as prim on paper." 

Dr. Rohmer was not amused. He gave Mrs. Olinski a 
capsule lecture on what multiculturalism really means. 

"Oh," she said, "then we're still safe, Dr. Rohmer. You 
can tell the taxpayers that the Epiphany Middle School 
team has one Jew, one half-Jew, a WASP, and an Indian." 

"Jews, half-Jews, and WASPs have nothing to do with 


diversity, Mrs. Olinski. The Indian does. But we don't call 
them Indians anymore. We call them Native Americans." 

"Not this one," she replied. 

"Mrs. Olinski," Dr. Rohmer asked, "would you like it if 
people called you a cripple?" 

Mrs. Olinski gave up. Everyone believed that she could 
be wounded by the word cripple. She could never explain to 
Dr. Rohmer, nor would she try to, that the word itself does 
not hurt, but the manner of its delivery can. For all of his 
training, Dr. Rohmer would never believe that cripples 
themselves are a diverse group, and some make jokes. 

Nadia was the redhead of Mrs. Olinski's diverse group. 

Had she been bom five hundred years sooner, Raphael 
would have chosen her as a model for his cherubs. Tendrils 
of bright red hair framed her face, a spray of freckles pow- 
dered her nose, and she was as plump as a perfectly ripened 
peach. Raphael probably would have painted out the freck- 
les, and that would have been a mistake. Like brushing the 
cinnamon off cinnamon toast. 

For the first few weeks of the new school year, Nadia 
hardly spoke. All the sixth graders— like Mrs. Olinski her- 
self— were new to Epiphany Middle School, but Nadia— 
like Mrs. Olinski herself— seemed most disconnected. Both 
were watchers and waiters, cautious about being friendly, 
about showing themselves. 

Then on the middle Monday in October, Nadia 
Diamondstein arrived in class with a smile and addressed 
her teacher. "Don't you think, Mrs. Olinski, that autumn is 
the most glorious time of year?" Mrs. Olinski 'confessed 
that it was her favorite season and told Nadia that she 
sometimes felt guilty because she thought she ought to 


22 


23 



prefer spring, with its pledge to make the lilies bloom again. 

Every morning thereafter, Nadia smiled as she entered 
class and greeted Mrs. Olinski with a word from her south- 
ern past. She said, "Hey." 

Mrs. Olinski knew that Nadia Diamondstein was not 
only incandescently beautiful but was also a star. 

 

T he commissioner of education picked up the 
next question. Looking over the rims of his 
reading glasses, he slowly unfolded the paper. 
"This question has two parts," he said. To receive 
credit, you must answer both parts." Lowering his 
eyes, he read, "What is the name given to that portion 
of the North Atlantic Ocean that is noted for its abun- 
dance of seaweed, and what is its importance to the 
ecology of our planet?" 

Nadia Diamondstein rang in. 


24 


Nadia Tells of Turtle Love 

My grandfather is a slim person of average height with 
heavy, heathery-gray eyebrows. He lives in a high-rise con- 
dominium on the beach in Florida. He lives there with his 
new wife whom he calls Margy. I was told to call her 
Margaret, not Aunt Margaret or Mrs. Diamondstein. It 
sounded disrespectful to me— calling a woman old enough 
to be my grandmother by her first name, but I did as I was 
told. 

Last summer, just before my grandfather married 
Margaret, my mother and father got divorced, and Mother 
moved the two of us to upstate New York where she had 
grown up. She said that she needed some autumn in her 
life. I had never thought that I would see autumn in New 
York or anywhere else because even when we vacationed 
at a place that had one, we always had to return for school 
before it started. In Florida school starts before Labor 
Day. Whatever it says on the calendar, Florida has de facto 
summer. 

Dividing up my time was part of the divorce settlement. 
I was to spend Thanksgiving, spring vacation, and one 
month over the summer with Dad. He left Christmas holi- 


25 



days for Mother because it is her holiday, not his. I am the 
product of a mixed marriage. 

This first summer of their separation, Dad chose August 
for his visitation rights. He picked us up early Friday 
evening. Us means Ginger and me. Ginger is my dog. 1 do 
not know who was happier to see me at the airport— Dad or 
Ginger. The worst part of the trip had been checking 
Ginger into the baggage compartment. 

Dad always was a nervous person, but since the divorce 
he had become terminally so. He was having a difficult time 
adjusting to being alone. He had sold the house that we 
lived in when we were a family and had moved into a swing- 
ing singles apartment complex, but my father could no more 
swing than a gate on rusty hinges. 

For the first day and a half after I arrived. Dad hovered 
over me like the Goodyear blimp over the Orange Bowl. He 
did not enjoy the hovering, and I did not enjoy being hov- 
ered, but he did not know what to do with me, and I did not 
know what to tell him, except to tell him to stop hovering, 
which seemed to be the only thing he knew how to do. 

On Sunday we went to see Grandpa Izzy and Margaret. 

Grandpa Izzy was happy to see me. Under those bushy 
eyebrows of his, Grandpa Izzy's eyes are bright blue like the 
sudden underside of a bird wing. His eyes have always been 
the most alive part of him, but when Bubbe Frieda died, 
they seemed to die, too. Since he married Margaret though, 
they seem bright enough to give off light of their own. He 
is sixty-nine years old, and he is in love. 

Margaret is a short blonde. She is very different from 
my bubbe but not very different from the thousands who 
make their home in South Florida. There are so many blond 
widows in the state of Florida, and they are all so much 


alike, they ought to have a kennel breed named and regis- 
tered for them. Like all the others, Margaret dresses atro- 
ciously. She wears pastel -colored pantsuits with elastic 
waists or white slacks with overblouses of bright, bold 
prints. She carries her eyeglasses— blue-rimmed bifocals— 
on a gold metal chain around her neck. They all do. 
Margaret is not fat, but she certainly is not slim. She is thick 
around the middle, and when she wears her green polyester 
pantsuit, she looks like a Granny Smith apple. Grandpa Izzy 
would say Delicious. 

Grandpa Izzy and Margaret are like Jack-Sprat-could- 
eat-no-fat and his wife-could-eat-no-lean. Grandpa Izzy 
says that Margaret is zaftig, which is Yiddish for pleasingly 
plump. Everything about her pleases him. He seems to find 
it difficult to keep himself from pinching her or pinching 
himself for having had the good fortune to find and marry 
her. Such public displays of affection can be embarrassing to 
a prepubescent girl like me who is not accustomed to being 
in the company of two married people who like each other. 

On Sunday we went out for brunch at one of those 
mammoth places where the menu is small and the portions 
are large, and every senior citizen leaves with a Styrofoam 
box containing leftovers. We had to wait to be seated at the 
restaurant because Sunday brunch is a major social custom 
in Florida retirement communities. Dad twice asked the 
restaurant hostess how much longer we would have to wait. 
Grandpa Izzy and Margaret tried to tell Dad that they did 
not mind waiting since visiting with each other was part of 
the plan, and they did not mind doing it at the restaurant. 
But hovering at low altitudes seemed to be my father's new 
best thing. 

When we were finally seated, we had a nice enough 


26 


17 



time. Margaret had Belgian waffles and did not require a 
Styrofoam box for leftovers because there were none,- she 
ate everything that was on her plate— strawberry preserves, 
pseudo whipped cream and all. She did not order decaf cof- 
fee but drank three cups of regular. 

Margaret was not at all curious about me. I thought she 
would want to know how 1 liked our new home, which is in 
Epiphany, the very town she had lived in before she moved 
to Florida. Maybe she thought that I was not curious about 
her because 1 did not ask her about her wedding, which nei- 
ther Mother nor I attended. But I believe that the grown-up 
should ask the questions first, and besides, Mother and I had 
gotten a full report on the wedding from Noah Gershom 
who, due to unforeseen circumstances, had been best man. 
I did not find Noah's account of the events surrounding his 
becoming best man quite as amusing as he did, but for sev- 
eral complicated reasons, I did not express my opinion. 

One of the complications was that my mother works for 
Dr. Gershom, who is Noah's father. My mother is a dental 
hygienist by profession, and Dr. Gershom is a dentist. One 
of the reasons we moved to Epiphany was that Mother got 
a job there. My mother happens to be an excellent hygien- 
ist, and Dr. Gershom was lucky to get her, but nevertheless, 
I thought it best not to tell Noah Gershom that his account 
of my grandfather's wedding was not as amusing as he 
thought it was. 

Dad's new apartment complex was miles away from our 
old neighborhood. I called two of my former friends, but 
getting together with them was not easy. Our schedules, 
which had once matched, seemed to be in different time 
zones now. Geography made the difference. 


When we finally got together, 1 thought we would have 
fun. We did not. Either I had changed, or they had changed, 
or all of us had. I would not try again. I concluded that many 
friendships are born and maintained for purely geographical 
reasons. I preferred Ginger. 

Work seemed to be the only thing that held Dad to- 
gether, but leaving me alone that week while he went to the 
office made him feel guilty and ended up making him even 
more nervous, if such a thing were possible. I spent part of 
my time at the apartment complex pool, which was almost 
empty during the day. I read and watched talk shows and 
took Ginger on walks around the golf course that bordered 
the swinging singles complex. I enjoyed not having Dad 
hover over me, but 1 did not tell him so. 

Grandpa Izzy called every day. He volunteered to come 
to swinging singles to pick me up after Dad left for work 
and after the morning rush-hour traffic. All the retirees in 
South Florida wait for the rush-hour traffic to be over, so 
that when they go out on the highways, they can create 
their own rush hour. But I declined. Then on Thursday, after 
I had had the unsatisfactory visit with my former friends, 
Grandpa Izzy called with a different suggestion. He asked 
Dad to drop me off at their place in the morning before he 
went to work. Margaret's grandson Ethan, who was my age, 
had arrived, and Grandpa Izzy thought a visit would be 
good for both of us. I thought he meant Ethan and me, but 
maybe he meant Dad and me because after he took the call, 
the look on my father's face was a new way to spell relief. 

My only requirement was that I be allowed to bring 
Ginger. A lot of retirement high-rises have rules against 
dogs, visiting or otherwise, and 1 did not know Margaret's 
position on dogs. Grandpa Izzy said that Ginger would not 




29 



be a problem. Of course, she never was. Ginger is a genius. 

1 did not know if I was developing an interest in boys, or 
if I would have washed my hair and put on my new blouse 
anyway. Perhaps, I was leaving prepubescence and was en- 
tering full pubescence or, perhaps, 1 was simply curious 
about Ethan. For example, why had Margaret said nothing 
about his coming when we had seen each other at Sunday's 
brunch? Margaret had mentioned having a grandson who 
was my age, but she said very little about him. Most grand- 
mothers of her species carry a coffee-table-sized photo 
album in their tote-bag-sized pocketbooks. Either Margaret 
was a rare subspecies of grandmother or her grandson Ethan 
had done something strange to his hair. When grandmoth- 
ers disapprove of grandsons, it is usually their hair. Their 
hair or their music. Or both. She must have known about 
his visit for at least two weeks because everybody I know 
has to buy airline tickets that far in advance to get the dis- 
count. 

Grandpa Izzy's high-rise retirement condominium was 
three towns north of Dad's swinging singles apartment com- 
plex. The highway between them is bumper to bumper. Dad 
misjudged the time it would take to get there, so we did not 
arrive until after they had left for their morning walk. Dad 
gave me a key. I let myself in. There was a note on the re- 
frigerator door saying that they had gone for their turtle 
walk and to make myself at home. The note was in 
Margaret's handwriting. No mistaking her «'s for w's or her i's 
for e's. Margaret's handwriting was the smooth, round style 
used by the older generation of schoolteachers, which is ex- 
actly what Margaret was before she became an elementary 
school principal, which is what she was before she retired. 


Ginger and I waited on the balcony and watched the 
three of them approach. Ethan appeared to be almost as tall 
as Margaret and almost as blond, but not for the same rea- 
son. From the distance of the balcony— it was the third 
floor— he appeared to be a healthy prepubescent. Of 
course, except for my father, appearances do not always tell 
much about a person's nervous condition. 

The three of them were very excited when they re- 
turned. 

Even though Ethan is Margaret's grandson, it was 
Grandpa who introduced me because Margaret did not. She 
went straight to the desk to dig a record book out of the 
drawer. "Ethan's lucky," Grandpa said. "Only his second day 
here, and this evening, we will be digging out one of our 
nests.'' 

He was talking about turtle nests. Turtles had brought 
Grandpa and Margaret together. 

The year after Bubbe Frieda had died. Grandpa Izzy sold 
their little house and moved to Century Village. For the 
next two years, early every morning, before the day got too 
hot, he drove to the beach where he took a walk. Many 
people from Century Village walked the beach where there 
was a sidewalk with markers for every half mile. A year ago 
last spring he noticed a blond zaftig woman who was re- 
turning about the same time he was leaving, so he began 
starting out earlier and earlier until, one day, they started 
out together. He introduced himself and asked her if she 
would like to take a walk with him. She replied by inviting 
him to join her on her turtle walk. 

He accepted, not even knowing where or what it was. 

And they have been doing it together ever since. 


30 31 



Margaret was checking in her record book. "We moved 
one hundred seven eggs," she said. 

"We feel very protective of the nests we move," Grandpa 
explained to Ethan, who nodded as if he understood what 
Grandpa was talking about, leading me to believe that they 
had already explained turtles to him. 

Sea turtles need beaches, of which Florida has many 
miles. All up and down the coastline, female turtles come 
out of the ocean and paddle their way across the sand, dig 
a hole, and lay eggs— about a hundred at a time. They use 
their flippers first to dig the hole and then to scoop the sand 
back over it before returning to the sea. The female will lay 
three to five clutches of eggs during a season, return to the 
water, and not come out of the water again for two or three 
years, when she is ready to lay again. 

About fifty-five days after being laid, the eggs hatch. 

From the first of May when the first eggs get laid until 
Halloween night when the last of them hatches, turtle pa- 
trols walk assigned stretches of beach. Members of a turtle 
patrol are trained to recognize the flipper marks that the 
mother turtles make. 

About half the time the mother turtle lays her eggs in a 
dangerous place— where the eggs might get washed out be- 
cause they are within the high tide line or where they might 
get trampled by people or run over by cars. Turtle eggs are 
a gourmet feast to birds, big fish, and especially raccoons. 
People approved by the Department of Environmental 
Protection are allowed to move the nests to safer ground. 
They post a stake with a sign over all the nests they find— 
the ones they move and the ones they do not— saying that 


it is against the law to disturb the nest. If you do, you can 
be fined up to $50,000 and/or go to jail for a year. The signs, 
which are bright yellow, make it very clear that it is an and/or 
situation. 

Loggerheads are a threatened species. That means that 
they are not as seriously missing as endangered, but almost. 
Last year, encouraged by Grandpa !zzy, I did my science re- 
port on Florida turtles. We studied together. We accompa- 
nied Margaret on her turtle walks. (1 called her Mrs. Draper 
then. I never guessed that only months later we would be- 
come almost related.) I got an A ; Grandpa got permitted. 
Margaret had been permitted when they met. 

I saved my report. I had begun it by asking, "Do you 
think it is harder to name Mr. Walter Disney's Seven Dwarfs 
or to name all five of the species of turtles that migrate off 
the coast of Florida?" My grandfather thought that was a 
wonderful way to begin a report. I had drawn a cover that 
showed all five kinds (loggerheads, greens, leatherbacks, 
hawksbill, and Kemp's ridley). My teacher commented on 
my cover, saying that it was exceptional. I saved the report 
because 1 thought I would draw a different cover— one 
showing a map of Florida beaches— and use it again in sixth 
grade when we were required to do a Florida history report. 
I did not know then that when I started sixth grade, I would 
be living in the state of divorce and New York. 

Grandpa Izzy said, "Why don't you stay, Nadia? You've 
always enjoyed watching a nest being dug out. Ethan's com- 
ing." He looked over at Ethan, inviting him to reinforce the 
invitation. Ethan nodded slightly. "It'll be like old times," 
Grandpa said. 

How could my Grandpa Izzy even begin to think that 



our digging out a nest would be like old times? In old times, 
which were not so very long ago, I would have enjoyed— 
even been excited about— digging out a turtle nest. In old 
times Margaret would still be Mrs. Draper, and I would nei- 
ther know nor care that she had a grandson Ethan. 

"When will this happen?" I asked. 

"After sunset, as usual," Grandpa replied, looking at me 
curiously, for he knew I knew. 

"Oh, that is too bad," I said. "Dad is picking me up be- 
fore supper, and he will be disappointed if I do not eat with 
him." 

Grandpa said that he would call Dad at work and have 
him stop over so that he, too, could watch. And hefore I 
could tell them the real truth— that I would rather not at- 
tend at all— they had Dad on the telephone and everything 
was arranged, I was not angry, but I was seriously annoyed. 

That afternoon the four of us went to the pool. I had to 
leave Ginger back at the apartment because dogs were not 
allowed at poolside. I had not brought my bathing suit, so I 
had to sit by the pool while the others swam. Margaret said 
that she was sorry that she did not have a bathing suit to 
lend me. "I don't think mine will fit," she said. I think she 
was attempting to make a joke because she smiled when she 
said it. 

I do not know who, besides Margaret herself, any 
bathing suit of hers would fit. She had what the catalogs call 
"a mature figure," and she was not at all self-conscious about 
it or the starbursts of tiny blue veins on both her inner and 
outer thighs. Bubbe Frieda had never been zajtig, but she had 
had the good taste to wear what is called "a dressmaker 
bathing suit." It had a little skirt and a built-in bra. Of 


course, my bubbe's bathing suit never got wet, and Margaret 
did forty-two laps. 

Ethan practiced a few dives. Grandpa coached him. 
Then they came and sat by me. I was curious to know if 
Ethans trip had been planned long before they announced 
it. I asked him if he had changed planes in Atlanta. He said 
that he had. "On my flight out of Atlanta, there were seven 
unaccompanied minors," 1 said. 

He smiled. "There were only five on mine. I guess I was 
a little late in the season." 

"Did you have an advance reservation?" I asked. 

‘Yes," he replied. "Why do you ask?" 

“1 was just wondering," I said. I did not tell him what I 
was wondering about. "When you travel with a pet," I 
added, "you must plan in advance. The worst part of my trip 
was worrying about Ginger. She had to fly as baggage. We 
were advised to tranquilize her and put her in a dog carrier. 
Ginger had never been tranquilized before, and she has 
been dopey all week. She is just now getting back to her real 
self. 1 promised her that I will not do that again." 

"How will you get her back?" 

"I am going to talk to her and tell her to be quiet so that 
I do not have to tranquilize her." 

"Maybe you just gave her too strong a dose." 

"Maybe. But I do not care to experiment. She will make 
the trip just fine. Ginger is a genius." 

"Someone has written a book about the intelligence of 
animals. Border collies are smartest." 

"Ginger would not be listed. She is a mixed breed. Like 
me." 

"What's your mix?” 

"Half-Jewish,- half-Protestant." 



"That's good," he said. "Like corn. It's called hybrid 
vigor." 

I took that as a compliment, but 1 did not thank him for 
it. "Are you a hybrid?" I asked. 

"Not at all. The only claim my family has to hybridiza- 
tion is right there," he said, pointing to Margaret. "Grandma 
Draper is a thoroughbred Protestant, and Izzy is a thor- 
oughbred Jew. But they don't plan on breeding." 

I think I blushed. 

Margaret was in charge of fifteen permitted volunteers. 
That meant that if she could not do the turtle patrol, one of 
them could. Permitted volunteers were licensed to move a 
nest or dig out a nest after the eggs had hatched, but they 
had to be supervised by her. All fifteen of Margarets 
permitteds, plus friends and other interested parties showed 
up for the digging out. As soon as other beach walkers saw 
the hovering over the nest, they joined in. The audience 
was enthusiastic. They ooohed and aaahed, and at least 
once every three minutes, one way or another, someone said 
that nature was wonderful. Four people said, "Fascinating." 
Ethan did not oooh or aaah, and he did not say fascinating. 
He watched as patiently as a cameraman from National 
Geographic. My father hovered with the rest of them and said 
"fascinating" twice. Hovering had become his great recre- 
ational pastime. 

Turtle patrols keep very close watch on all the nests on 
their stretches of beach, and they know when they are ripe 
for hatching, and sometimes they are lucky enough to be 
there when the turtle nests are emerging. That is what a 
hatching is called. When the turtles push their way out of 


the sand and start waddling toward the waters edge, they 
look like a bunch of wind-up toys escaped from Toys "R" Us. 
Watching a nest hatch is more interesting than digging one 
out after they've hatched, which is really only a matter of 
keeping inventory and making certain that everything that 
was or is living is cleared out. During old times, I had 
ooohed and aaahed at the digging out, but that evening it 
seemed as exciting as watching a red light change. 

Like a proud parent, Margaret watched as Grandpa Izzy 
dug out the nest. Wearing a rubber glove on his hand, he 
reached down into the nest as far as his arm pit, He re- 
moved: 

96 empty egg shells 

4 unhatched whole eggs 

1 dead hatchling 

3 turtles that were half-in/half-out of the shell 
but were dead. Those are called dead-pipped. 

t turtle that was half-in/half-out of the shell but 
was alive. Those are called live-pipped. 

2 live ones 

Margaret took notes, counted again, and said at last that 
it all added up. 

Grandpa released the two live turtles onto the sand. 
Everyone lined up on either side of them as they made their 
way to the water's edge. 

Turtles almost always hatch at night, and after they do, 
they head toward the light. Normally, the light they head 
for is the horizon on the ocean. However, if a hotel or high- 
rise along the ocean leaves its lights on, the turtles will head 


36 


37 



toward the brighter light of civilization and never make it to 
the ocean. They do not find food, and they die. Turtles are 
not trainable animals. Their brains are in the range of mini 
to micro. 

When the two hatchlings reached the water, everyone 
along the parade route applauded, and my father said fasci- 
nating for the third time. 

Back at the nest, Margaret examined the live-pipped. 
She announced, "I've decided to keep it." Judge, jury, and 
defending attorney. 

Dad asked what would happen to it, and Margaret ex- 
plained, "It'll take a few days to straighten itself out. We'll 
give it a safe, cool, dark place in the utility room and release 
it after sunset when it's ready." 

Dad could have asked me. I did get an A on that report. 

When baby turtles come out of their shells, which are 
round— about the same size as a golf ball— they are 
squinched up into a round shape that fits inside the eggs. 
After they break through the shell, they spend three days 
down in the sand hole straightening themselves out. 
Sometimes they die before they make it out of the shell. 
Those are the dead-pipped. They are counted and discarded 
with the unhatched and the empties. A permitted person 
has to decide if the live-pipped are more alive than dead. If 
the decision is that they stand a good chance of surviving, 
they need care. They are lifted from the nest and taken 
home and given shelter until they straighten themselves 
out, and then they are released onto the sand. 

"We never carry them to the water/' Margaret explained. 
'They must walk across their native sand. We think that 


something registers in their brains that kicks in twenty-five 
years later because they return to the beach where they 
were born to lay their eggs." 

As Margaret was explaining this, I thought about my 
mother's returning to New York. Her birthday is September 
12, and I wondered if her need to return to autumn in New 
York had anything to do with some switch that had been 
turned on when she emerged. 

Back at the condo, Grandpa carried the bucket contain- 
ing the live-pipped into the utility room, and we all sat 
down to have milk and cookies. Oreos. Bubbe would have 
had homemade ruggelach. Margaret did not even know 
what ruggelach were until Grandpa Izzy took her to a 
kosher delicatessen and introduced her to them. She already 
knew about bagels because bagels have become popular 
even in places that never heard of them. 

Margaret liked ruggelach, but I could tell she had no in- 
tention of learning how to make them. Grandpa Izzy, who 
had enjoyed ruggelach and bobka as much as anyone, had 
adjusted to Entenmann’s and Oreos. I asked Ethan if he 
knew ruggelach. He did not. Knowing ruggelach is a hybrid 
advantage. 

Before the evening was over, Grandpa Izzy suggested 
that Dad bring me back early enough so that 1 could take 
the morning turtle walk with him and Margaret and Ethan. 

Then Margaret said, "Allen, why don't you come, too? 
The exercise will be good for your foot." Dad had broken 
his foot on the day of their wedding, and it had not yet 
healed. Margaret believed that a bad mental attitude had 
slowed it down. Much to my surprise, Dad agreed. "What 
about Ginger?" I asked. 


38 


39 



"No problem," Grandpa Izzy said. "Just keep her on a 
leash like old times." 

I started to say that Ginger has grown to hate the leash, 
but once again a look on Dad's face told me something, and 
I said nothing. So it was from a look of Dad's and a sentence 
left unspoken that the sequel to the turtle habit got started. 

Dad and I would leave his apartment early, meet 
Margaret, Grandpa, and Ethan on the beach, and do our 
walk. Then Dad would return to Grandpas and change into 
his business suit and leave for work. If time permitted, Dad 
would join us for breakfast. If not, the four of us would eat 
without him. We usually watched the rest of the Today Show 
before going for a swim. 

Grandpa and Ethan got into an unofficial contest about 
how many laps they could do. I did not participate. I took a 
short swim, got out of the water, sat on the sidelines and 
read while Grandpa was teaching Ethan how to dive. He 
wanted to teach me, too, but I preferred not to. 

One afternoon, we went to the movies. It was blazing 
hot and bright outside. We went into the movies where it 
was cool and dark, and then we came back out into the 
bright, hot sun. I felt as if I had sliced my afternoon into 
thirds, like a ribbon sandwich. Ethan, who never said much, 
had a lot to say about the camera angles and background 
music and described the star's performance as subtle. Never 
before in all my life had I heard a boy use the word subtle. 

Dad had tickets for The Phantom of the Opera. This was the 
real Broadway show except that it was the road company. 
Not knowing that Ethan would be visiting, he had bought 
only four. As soon as he found out that Ethan would be in 


town, he started calling the ticket office to buy one more, 
but there were none to be had. He kindly volunteered to 
give up his ticket, but Grandpa Izzy and Margaret would not 
hear of it. Margaret said that she would stay home, and 
Grandpa Izzy said that he didn't want to go if she didn't. 

I expected Ethan to do the polite thing and say that he 
would stay home. But he did not. Of course, Ethan usually 
said nothing. Even when it was appropriate to say some- 
thing, Ethan could be counted on to say nothing. But on the 
subject of who should give up a ticket, Ethan was particu- 
larly silent, which was a subtle hint that he really wanted to 
go. At the very last minute, the problem was solved. One of 
Dad's clients mentioned that he had an extra ticket, and Dad 
bought it from him on the spot. 

We met at the theater. Ethan had insisted upon taking 
the odd seat, saying that he would be fine. The odd seat was 
three rows in front of ours and closer to the center of the 
stage, but I do not think Ethan knew it at the time. I think 
he wanted to be alone, or, 1 should say, without us. At in- 
termission, Ethan bought one of the ten-dollar souvenir 
programs, and after the show he thanked my father at least 
five times for getting him a ticket. 

Dad was pleased with the way the evening had turned 
out. We went to the Rascal House for ice-cream sundaes 
after the show. Ethan could hardly keep himself from 
thumbing through his ten-dollar program. His head must 
have stayed back at the theater long after we left, for when 
the waitress asked for his order, he said, "They must have 
more trapdoors on that stage than a magic act." 

My father actually hummed as he looked over the menu, 
and then right after we placed our orders, he dropped his 
bombshell. 


40 


41 



He asked Margaret if he could be listed on her permit. 
He would like to be able to substitute for her or Grandpa 
Izzy. His apartment house was not far from a beach, he ex- 
plained, and he would transfer to someone's permit there 
after I went back north. Then he would like to train so that 
he could head up a turtle patrol. His goal was to get li- 
censed. 

"Like father, like son," he said, patting Grandpa Izzy on 
the back. 

Margaret said, "We'll get the process started tomorrow." 
She must have been quite proud of her loggerheads. They 
got her my grandpa, and now they got her my dad. 

I did not care. I had Ginger. I preferred animals with fur 
and some measure of intelligence. Ginger had grown sleek 
and muscular with our long turtle walks. She was more af- 
fectionate than ever. For example, when we got back to the 
apartment after The Phantom of the Opera, she greeted me as if 
I were the best friend she had ever had. 

Inside me there was a lot of best friendship that no one 
but Ginger was using. 

The day after Dad dropped his bombshell, he and 
Ethan, Margaret and Grandpa walked the beach together, a 
tight, three-generation foursome. They got ahead of Ginger 
and me, and I made no effort to catch up. Instead, I slowed 
down and walked at the water's edge so that I could kick at 
the waves as they rolled ashore. Ginger and I fell farther and 
farther behind the others. I saw Ethan stop to wait for 
Ginger and me to catch up. He did not call to us, and I pre- 
tended that I did not notice. Ethan waited until Ginger and 
I were midway between Grandpa, Dad, and Margaret— 
until we were half-pipped— and then I slowed down even 


more. Dad stopped, called to Ethan— not to me— to catch 
up. Ethan looked toward Ginger and me, then toward 
Grandpa and Margaret, waited another second or two, and 
then walked fast-forward until he caught up with Dad, 
Grandpa, and Margaret. 

On Tuesday evening we watched a nest hatch. It was 
one of theirs. "Theirs" means that it was one that Margaret 
had moved. Like the one on the first night of our turtle 
walks, this one also contained a hundred and seven eggs, 
but this time all one hundred seven turtles emerged. "One 
hundred percent," Grandpa cried, and he hugged Margaret. 
Then he congratulated Ethan and Dad. Ginger and I stayed 
on the fringe because I had to hold Ginger on a short leash 
so that she would not start chasing the baby turtles. 
Grandpa did not hug or congratulate me. 

We all returned to Grandpas apartment, and Dad in- 
sisted on taking us all out to the Dairy Queen to celebrate. 
Margaret ate a whole Peanut Buster Parfait without once 
mentioning cholesterol or calories. 

1 was sitting at poolside, reading. After doing our turtle 
walk, Margaret had gone to her volunteer duties at the gar- 
den club, and Grandpa Izzy had gone to his at the public 
library. Ethan and I were to let ourselves into their condo 
and start lunch. Ethan finished his laps and came out of the 
water. He sat at the deep end with his legs dangling into the 
water. I joined him at the pool's edge and put my feet into 
the water, too. I noticed that he had his key on an elastic 
cord around his ankle, and I also noticed that he had a key 
chain ornament that looked like a giant molar. As the 
daughter of a dental hygienist, I was interested in his key 
chain ornament and asked him where he got it. 


42 


A2 



"From your mother," he said. 

I was not prepared for his answer. "My mother?" I asked 
in a voice that was too loud even for the out-of-doors. 

"Well, yes. Your mother works for Dr. Gershom, doesn't 
she?" 

"As a matter of fact, she does." 

"She cleaned my teeth," he said. 

There is not a worse feeling in this world than the feel- 
ing that someone knows something about you that he has 
known for almost a whole summer and has kept to himself. 
Even sharing what he knows about you with others is not as 
bad as knowing something and not telling you he knows. 
All you can think about is what he was really thinking the 
whole time he was speaking to you or walking the beach 
with you or swimming laps or playing fetch with your dog 
Ginger. I felt as if 1 had been spied on. I felt as if I had been 
stalked. 

My heart was pumping gallons of blood up to my face. 
1 could feel my neck throb. I controlled my voice so that it 
would, not quiver. I said, "You should have told me that. You 
should have told me long before now. A person with good 
manners would have." 

Ethan said, "1 didn't think it was important." 

I caught my breath and asked an intermediate question, 
"Does your mother also know Dr. Gershom?" 

"He's our family dentist." 

"And Margaret? Does she also know him?” 

"I told you. He is our family dentist. Grandma Draper is 
part of our family. Before she moved to Florida, he was her 
dentist, too." 

"Do not adopt that tone with me, Ethan Potter." 

"What tone?" 


'The tone of being patient and tolerant as if the ques- 
tions 1 am asking are dumb questions. They are not dumb 
questions. I need to know what you know that I do not." 

"I don't know what you don't know, so how can I know 
what I know and you don't?" 

"Now, that is a dumb question. That is a really a very 
stupid question." 

"I don't think so." 

"Just tell me what you knew about my mother and me 
and my father before we met." 

"Okay. I'll tell you what I knew about you if you'll tell 
me what you knew about me." 

"All right. You go first." 

"When your mother said that she was divorcing your fa- 
ther and wanted to move to New York where she grew up, 
my grandmother set things up with Dr. Gershom." 

"Margaret set what things up?" 

'The job interview." 

"Mother's job interview with Dr. Gershom?" 

"I thought that was what we were talking about— your 
mother's job with Dr. Gershom." 

"We are talking about what you know that I do not." 

"And I am trying to tell you. Your mother told Izzy and 
Grandma Draper that she wanted to move to New York 
State, so Grandma set up a job interview with Dr. 
Gershom." 

I had stayed in Florida with Dad while Mother had gone 
north to find a job and a house. No one— not Dad, not 
Mother, not Grandpa Izzy— no one had told me that 
Margaret had set up Mother's job interview with Dr. 
Gershom. Margaret could have. The others should have. 
No one seemed to think that it would matter to me where I 


45 



lived. No one seemed to think that it would matter to me 
whether I spent my life in New York or Florida or commut- 
ing between the two. 

My throat was dry. I took a deep breath of the chlorine- 
saturated pool air and asked, "Is there anything else you 
know about me that I don't know?" 

Ethan shrugged. "Only that Noah was best man at 
Grandma and Izzy's wedding." 

'The whole world knows that. I am asking you one last 
time. What do you know about me that I do not know you 
know?" 

"Not much. Only that Noah never said what nice guys 
your dad and Izzy are." 

"That is what you do not know. I was asking you what 
you do know." The pulse in my neck was about to break 
through the skin. 

"I do know that you're pretty mad right now, and I think 
now you ought to tell me what you knew about me." 

"Nothing." 

"My grandma told you nothing about me?" 

'That is correct. She said nothing about you. She did 
not even tell me that you were coming even though she had 
several opportunities to do so." 

Ethan then asked a strange question. "Did she tell you 
anything about Luke?" 

"Luke what? Luke warm?" 

"My brother Lucas, called Luke. Did she tell you any- 
thing about him?" 

"She did not." 

Ethan smiled, more to himself than to me. 'Well," he 
said, "we Potters make an art of silence." 


"Your grandmother is a Draper." 

"See?" he said, grinning. "It comes to me from both sides 
of my family." 

I did not speak to him for the rest of the day, and when 
he left the pool to return to the condo for lunch, 1 did not 
go with him. I thought that it would do him good to know 
how it felt to be the recipient rather than the giver of si- 
lence. 

It was obvious that it was Margaret who had made 
possible my mother's leaving my father. Margaret 
Diamondstein, formerly Draper, helped my mother move to 
New York. She moved turtles from one nest to another. She 
moved Grandpa Izzy out of Century Village. And now, she 
was helping my father get permitted. By next turtle season, 
she will be helping him move to the beach. Margaret 
Diamondstein, formerly Draper, was an interfering person. 

I did not need Margaret interfering with my life. I would 
have nothing more to do with her. That meant no more 
walking on the beach. That meant no more swimming and 
breakfast. That meant no more turtle walks. 

Never again a turtle walk. Never. 

I would stop and never tell her why. 

Never. 

I was still at the pool when Dad came to pick me up. I 
went back to the condo while they all went down to the 
beach to check on a nest. After I showered and dressed, I 
watched from the balcony, staying back by the wall where I 
could not be seen. Ginger whimpered to let me know that 
she wanted to be down there, but I thought that at the very 
least, my dog ought to stay by— and on— my side. 



I wanted to leave my fathers house. I wanted to go 
home, to autumn. 

That evening as we were driving back to swinging sin- 
gles, I asked my father if he knew that Margaret had set up 
Mothers job interview, 
i did." 

"I think you could have told me." 

"I didn't think it was important." 

"Why does everyone think they know what is important 
to me? This was important. This is important. Do you think 
it is right that you should know and Ethan should know, and 
I should not?" 

All he said was, "I didn't know that Ethan knew." I waited 
for Dad to say something more, to apologize, or simply tell 
me that I was right, but he did not. Like Ethan, my father 
has a strong taste for silence. Mother always said, ‘Your fa- 
ther is not a communicator." She made that statement more 
than once. Sometimes more than once a day. I was glad that 
I had made the decision not to go on any more turtle walks 
and not to communicate with anyone about my decision. 

The following morning when Dad knocked on my door, 
I was still undressed. He called through the closed door, 
"Better hurry. Well be late." I said nothing. He opened the 
door a crack and said, "Nadia? Nadia, are you all right?" 

"I am not going," I said. 

'What's the matter? Don't you feel well?" 

"1 feel fine. 1 have decided to stay here." 

"Why?" 

"It is not important." 

Dad waited by the door, waited for me to explain, but I 
said nothing. I wanted silence to make him as miserable as 


it had made me. He hesitated, then came into my room, sat 
on the edge of the bed, and said nothing. He hovered. I 
struggled with silence until I could not stand it another sec- 
ond, so I said, "Did you know that I did a report on turtles 
last year?" 

"Yes. I knew that." 

"You never seemed very interested in turtles when I did 
my report." 

"I guess I had other things on my mind." 

The pulse in my ears was so strong, I hardly heard him. 
"I guess it took an invitation from Margaret to get you in- 
terested." 

"Partly that and partly that I had the time." 

"Your child custody time," I said. Dad let out a long sigh 
and looked so embarrassed that I almost did not say what I 
was about to say, but I did. "I have decided not to spend 
your child custody time on turtle walks with Margaret and 
her grandson. Not today. Not tomorrow. Not ever. If you 
want to take turtle walks, you go ahead and take turtle 
walks. You can get permitted without me. All you need are 
turtles and Margaret." I had not only broken my silence, I 
was almost screaming. 

Dad looked at his watch. If there is one thing I really de- 
test, it is having someone look at his watch as he is talking 
to me. It says to me that time spent elsewhere is more im- 
portant than time spent talking to me. "I have an appoint- 
ment at the office in an hour." He glanced at his watch 
again. 

"I am sure it is an important appointment," I said. 

'Yes, it is," he replied. 

Dad was so preoccupied with time that he did not even 
notice the sarcasm in my voice. 

"Let me call Margaret to let her know we won't be there." 


48 


AC\ 



"You can go," I said. "You go. I would not want you to 
miss a turtle walk for my sake. It might interfere with your 
getting permitted." . 

"There's no way I can make it up there and back in time 
for my appointment." 

"Are you trying to tell me that I have kept you from your 
turtle walk?" 

"Well, no. But, yes." He looked confused. "What I meant 
to say is that, yes, this conversation has kept me from going 
on a turtle walk, but no, that is not what I am trying to tell 
you. You know that if it had not been for your unwillingness 
to go, I would have." 

He glanced at his watch again. "Let me call Margaret. 
Then we'll have time for breakfast, and we'll talk about it.” 
He started out the door, turned back and said, "I won't tell 
her why you're not coming." 

'Tell her. I do not care. She knows every other thing 
about me. Tell her," I said. “And do not count on me for 
breakfast. I do not want any." I turned my back to him and 
my face to the pillow. 

The telephone rang in the middle of the morning. I let 
the recorder get it. It was Margaret, telling me that she 
would come pick me up if I would call. I did not. Instead, I 
took Ginger for a walk around the golf course that borders 
swinging singles. When we returned, I saw that there was a 
message on the machine. 1 played it. It was Grandpa Izzy 
asking me to please call. I erased the message. I sat out by 
the pool for a while and read, came back to the apartment 
for lunch, and that is when I ate the breakfast cereal that my 
dad had put out on the counter in the kitchen. He called 
while I was eating. 1 did not pick the phone up then either. 

After lunch, I took Ginger for another walk, called the 
airline to see how much it would cost if I changed my ticket 

5n 


to go home early. Thirty-five dollars. I watched three talk 
shows on television. One was about teenagers whose moth- 
ers flirt with their boyfriends. They were pathetic. Another 
was about men who said they lost their jobs because they 
refused to cut off their ponytails. They were pathetic. The 
third was about people who pierce weird body parts: One 
girl had a silver nail run through her beilybutton, and an- 
other one had a diamond stud put in her tongue. One ex- 
posed her beilybutton, and the other stuck out her tongue. 
They were disgusting. The phone rang twice. It was my dad 
again, sounding worried that I was not answering. Then it 
was Margaret again, saying that she hoped we would come 
over since another nest was due to hatch. 

I erased all the messages. 

Not answering the phone but hearing what people on 
the other end were saying was a little bit like spying. I en- 
joyed it. 

Dad walked into the apartment looking frazzled. He 
was looking very much like the unstrung self who had 
picked me up from the airport. "Where were you?" he de- 
manded. "I have been calling every twenty minutes." 

“I noticed," I said. When he asked me why I had not 
returned his calls, I said that I did not think they were 
important. 

Tm taking tomorrow off," he said. 

"What are you going to do?" I asked. "Hover?" 

"What do you mean?" 

"Nothing." Nothing is a mean answer, but sometimes 
nothing works. Sometimes nothing else does. 

"I thought we might go up to Disney World. You used 
to like Epcot.” 

'What will I do with Ginger?" 1 asked. 


51 



"Well, let me find out what accommodations they have 
for dogs. ..." 

Just then the phone rang. Dad picked it up. 1 could tell 
by the way he was speaking that it was Grandpa Izzy asking 
if he would be coming over for the evening's turtle walk. 
When he hung up, Dad asked me if I would like to invite 
Ethan to come to Disney World with us. I could not believe 
he was asking me that question. I just stared at him. 

'Well," he said, "he seemed to enjoy The Phantom of the 
Opera so much, I thought he might enjoy ..." I continued to 
stare at my father and say nothing. He cleared his throat. "If 
you don't like the idea of asking Ethan, would you like to 
ask one of your friends from the old neighborhood?" He was 
practically pleading with me to ask someone. Without tur- 
tles my father did not know what to do with me. 

Even though Disney World was only a two hours' drive 
from his apartment, Dad had decided that it might be more 
fun if we stayed overnight at one of Disney's theme hotels. 
He called and got us reservations, and we went to our rooms 
to pack our overnight bags. 

That evening a northeaster hit the coast. The winds were 
thirty-five miles an hour with gales up to fifty. There was 
coastal flooding, which meant that the low lying highways 
and many side roads and ramps would be closed. That meant 
that the interstates that were normally bumper to bumper 
but moving would be bumper to bumper and not moving. 
Before we went to bed, Dad suggested that we avoid rush 
hour by starting out late in the morning instead of early. 

The phone rang at midnight. Dad called in to me and 
said that I should pick up the phone. It was Grandpa Izzy. 


"It's an emergency," he said, pleading. "Our hatchlings 
will be swept ashore by the winds. We have to harvest them 
early tomorrow before daylight. Before the birds get them. 
Margaret and I think you ought to drive up here now so that 
we can get an early start. Traffic will be impossible in the 
morning." 

Grandpa was so sincere, so concerned about the turtles, 
so convinced that we would answer his 91 1 that it was ob- 
vious Dad had never told him that I had canceled all future 
turtle walks. I waited to see how Dad would turn him down. 
Dad did his best thing,- he remained silent. 

Grandpa said, "Nadia, are you there? Are you on the 
line, darling?" 

"I am here, Grandpa. ..." 

"You know what will happen if we don't gather them up. 
Can’t you come?" 

"Dad and I had plans ..." 

"What plans, darling? You don't want the baby turtles to 
be blown ashore and die, do you? These are babies, Nadia. 
They need help." 

"Dad and I were going to Epcot ..." 

"Why do you want to go there to see Mr. Walter 
Disney's Version of the World when you can see Mother 
Nature's real thing?" I had to smile. Grandpa Izzy always 
called Disney World Mr. Walter Disney's Version of the World. 
Then he said, "Margaret and I need your help, Nadia. So do 
the turtles. Sometimes one species has to help another get 
settled." Grandpa was apologizing for not telling me about 
Margaret's meddling. 1 did not know what to say. 

Dad finally spoke up, "Let Mother Nature worry about 
the turtles. They can take care of themselves." 



But I knew that they could not. I said, "Let me talk to 
Dad, Grandpa. I will call you back." 

After I hung up, I went into the living room. Dad was in 
his pajamas. Striped. I had never seen Dad sitting in the liv- 
ing room in striped pajamas. He said, "Don't worry about 
the turtles, Nadia." 

I explained, "The turtles will be easy to spot— so out of 
place, washed up on shore. The birds will eat them." 

"They couldn't possibly eat them all." 

"Those that do not get eaten will be lost." 

"But, surely, the tide will come back and carry the sea- 
weed— and the turtles along with it— back out." He smiled 
again. "What comes ashore always washes back out. That's 
not a philosophical statement, Nadia. It's a fact." 

'They will be lost at sea." 

"Lost at sea? The sea is their home." 

"They will be lost at sea," I repeated. 

"Nadia," Dad said, "how can that happen?" 

"You have to understand turtles to understand how that 
will happen." 

"I don't think I do." 

"I told Grandpa I would talk to you." 

My father sat on the sofa, looking out of place in his 
striped pajamas. He nodded, a slow, thoughtful nod, and I 
knew that he would pay close attention, and I knew that I 
could explain it all. 

"It all starts," I said, "the minute the new hatchlings 
scamper over the sand toward the light of the horizon. 
Once they reach the water, they begin a swimming frenzy. 
They do not eat. They just swim and swim until they reach 
the Sargasso Sea. That is when they stop, and that is when 


Mother Nature turns off the swimming-frenzy switch and 
turns on a graze-and-grow switch. For the next five to ten 
years, they will stay in the Sargasso Sea, feeding off the 
small sea animals that live in the floating mats of sargasso 
grass. Tonight when the wind blows that seaweed ashore, 
there will be a lot of immature turtles in it— swept along 
with the sea grass they have called home." 

I paused in my narrative. I focused hard on Dad, and he 
focused hard on me. "Are you with me?" I asked. My father 
nodded, so I continued. "Here is the tragic part. Even if the 
tide does wash them back into the water, they will not be 
able to get back home because once the swimming-frenzy 
switch is turned off, it is turned off forever. Turtles do not 
have an emergency power pack or a safety switch to turn it 
on. So, there they are, once again at the water's edge, but 
this time they are without a mechanism for swimming east. 
And that is why they will be lost at sea. They will want to 
graze. They will have an appetite, but they will not be 
where they can satisfy it, and they will not know how to get 
there because they cannot turn back their internal clock. 
They will not find home. They will not find food. They will 
starve and grow weak and be eaten." 

My father did not once look at his watch or the clock on 
the table by the sofa. His listen-and-learn switch had been 
turned on, and his own internal clock was ticking. I studied 
my father, sitting on the pale gray living room sofa in his 
blue striped pajamas. The storm in our private lives had 
picked him up and put him out of place. Me, too. I, too, 
had been picked up from one place and set down in another. 
I, too, had been stranded. We both needed help resettling. 

"When Grandpa says that we must harvest the turtles, 
he means that we must gather them up and save them in 


54 


55 



buckets. Then we take them to Marineland. When the seas 
calm down, they will be taken fifty miles offshore and 
placed in the Sargasso Sea." 

Dad smiled. 'They need a lift." 

Ginger rubbed herself against my legs. I stroked her 
back. "Yes," 1 said, "they do." 

Without another word, we returned to our rooms, Dad 
and I. We got dressed. When we ran out to the car, the rain 
was coming down in sheets, and the wind was blowing 
so hard that umbrellas were useless. I held the back door 
open for Ginger, and she hopped in. Dad and I got pretty 
wet just from that short run to the car, and Ginger sat on 
the back seat, panting and smelling like the great wet dog 
she was. 

The rain battered the car, and the wipers danced back 
and forth, never really clearing the windshield. There were 
only a few cars on the road. We didn't pass any of them not 
only because it was dangerous to do so but also because we 
welcomed their red tail lights as a guide. Cars coming the 
other way made spray that splashed over the hood. Dad's 
hands were clenched on the steering wheel. 

These northeasters dump rain in squalls that last for 
miles, and then they let up briefly. During one of the few 
lulls in the storm, Dad leaned back slightly and asked, 
"What do the turtles do after they've finished their five to 
ten years in the Sargasso Sea?" 

"They go to the Azores and become bottom feeders for 
a few years." 

"And then?" 

"And then they grow up. When they are about twenty- 
five, they mate. The females come ashore and lay their 


eggs— on the same shore where they were born— and im- 
mediately return to the sea, not coming ashore again for two 
or maybe three years when they are again ready to lay eggs. 
The males never return to shore." 

Dad said, "You've left something out, Nadia. They are 
ten when they leave the Sargasso Sea, and they are twenty- 
five when they mate and lay eggs. What happens during the 
fifteen years between leaving the Azores and mating?" 

Realization hit me. I laughed out loud. We were riding 
into a squall again, and Dad was concentrating so hard on 
driving that I was not sure he was even waiting for my an- 
swer. "What is it?" he asked. 

"Another switch," I said. 

He took his eyes off the road long enough to demand, 
'Tell me, what do they do?” 

"In the years between leaving their second home and 
their return to their native beaches, they commute. Year 
after year, all up and down the Atlantic, turtles swim north 
in the summer and south in the winter. Did you already 
know that?" 

"I didn't know for sure, but I had my suspicions." 

I had to smile. "And did you have your suspicions about 
me?" 

"For a while," he said. Then he took his eyes off the road 
long enough to return my smile. "But not now." 

"Of course," I said, "I will be doing the same but oppo- 
site. 1 will commute north in the winter and south in the 
summer." 

"Yep," he said. "And there will be times when you or I 
will need a lift between switches." 

"Yes," I replied, "there will be times." 


56 


57 



3 

M rs. Olinski's very first teaching job had been in an 
elementary school whose principal required sixth 
graders to memorize at least fourteen lines of po- 
etry each month, insisted that fifth graders know their mul- 
tiplication tables up through twelve times twelve, and 
permitted no one to exchange valentines unless the names 
on the envelopes were written neatly and spelled correctly. 
There was no graffiti on the walls,- no gum chewing, running, 
or shoving in the halls. There was locker inspection once a 
month, and everyone who used the bathroom, flushed. 
That principal's name was Margaret Draper. 

Two years before Margaret Draper retired, the district 
reorganized its school system and sent sixth graders to mid- 
dle school instead of elementary. Sixth had once been the 
top grade in elementary school, and was now the bottom 
grade in middle school. But it was still the place where kids 
had mastered enough skills to be able to do something with 
them. It was still the place where kids could add, subtract, 
multiply and divide, and read. Mostly, they could read— 
really read. Sixth grade still meant that kids could begin to 
get inside the print and to the meaning. 

Mrs. Margaret Draper, who had never called herself an 


ed-you-kay-toar, had always been a superb teacher and 
principal, but between the time she had started as an ele- 
mentary school teacher and the time she had retired as a 
middle school principal, sixth grade had changed, but sixth 
graders had changed more. Sixth graders had stopped ask- 
ing "Now what?" and had started asking "So what?" She had 
not been sorry to retire when she did. 

That very first summer after Margaret Draper retired 
was when Eva Marie Olinski left teaching. That was the 
summer of her automobile accident. For all the many 
months following the accident, Mrs. Draper stayed in touch 
with the young Mrs. Olinski. They were both widows now, 
and they saw each other on a regular basis. 

After Margaret moved to Florida they continued to stay 
in touch in a Christmas card/life-milestone way. So Mrs. 
Olinski knew the major facts of Margy's life. Her move to 
Century Village, her marriage to Izzy Diamondstein, her 
trips, her turtles. 

Mrs. Olinski also knew that Ethan Potter was Margaret 
Draper's grandson even though Margy never had much to 
say about him. When Eva Marie saw that Ethan Potter was 
assigned to her homeroom, she refrained from asking 
Margy about him or Ethan about her. She wanted to dis- 
cover Ethan all by herself, so she watched him closely. 
Probably more closely than she watched the others. 

Ethan was smart, yes,- he had a certain independence of 
mind, yes, and he still asked "Now what?" instead of "So 
what?" 

When Mrs. Olinski decided that Ethan should be a 
member of her team, she did not tell Margy or, for that mat- 
ter, anyone else either. 


58 


59 



 

T he commissioner of education of the state of 
New York smiled as he read the next question. 
'The following places in New York State are 
associated with women famous in American history. I 
shall name the place,- you are required to tell me why 
it is important and name the woman associated with 
that place. You may choose three of the four places. If 
you answer all four, you will receive an extra two- 
point credit. If you choose to answer only three, the 
other team will have an opportunity to answer the 
fourth, and if correct, will receive one point. 

"The place names are: Seneca Falls, Homer, 
Rochester, and Auburn." 

Ethan rang in as the last syllable sounded. 

Yes. 

Ethan Potter would know all four parts. 

Yes, yes, yes, and yes. 

 


60 


Ethan Explains the b and B Inn 

I am always the longest rider. I live farther from school 
than anyone else on my route. I board the bus first and get 
off last. I always have. The bus ride is the worst part of the 
school day. It always has been. Going is bad; coming home 
is worse. 

On the first day of the new school year, I boarded the 
bus as usual, nodded to Mrs. Korshak, the driver, and 
walked to the back of the bus. All the way to the back. It 
was an unwritten rule that the seat you chose the first day 
became your assignment— unless you were so unruly that 
Mrs. Korshak made you change. I chose the last double seat 
on the side opposite the driver. I placed my backpack on the 
seat next to me, and as nonchalantly as I could, placed my 
leg over that. If luck held— as it had for the past two years— 
when the other kids boarded, they would choose seats that 
appeared to be less occupied, and I would not have to share 
my seat for the rest of the school year. 

I knew every stop along the route. I knew every house, 
every tree and shrub, every pothole in the road. My father 
is proud of the fact that there have been Potters in Clarion 
County since before Epiphany was a town. 


61 



There is a fuzzy, faded picture of my great- great- great- 
grandmother in the Clarion County Museum. The museum 
is located in the main room of an old schoolhouse that the 
local historical society saved from the wreckers ball by hav- 
ing it declared an historical landmark. My ancestor is 
marching behind Susan B. Anthony who is leading a group 
to the polls in Rochester. In the picture, my ancestor is 
wearing bloomers, which was what they called the trousers 
that were invented by Amelia Jenks Bloomer of Homer, 
New York, and suffragette is what they called the women 
who were fighting for a woman's right to vote. Instead of 
getting to vote, my triple-great-grandmother got arrested. 

There is no picture of her at the first convention for 
women's rights, but she was there. In the family archive, 
which my Grandmother Draper passed on to my mother 
when she moved to Florida, there is a letter from her, post- 
marked Seneca Falls and dated 1848. 

There have been farmers and educators on both sides of 
my family ever since there have been tractors and black- 
boards, and there have been strong women on my mothers 
side for just as long. 

Last August when I was visiting my grandmother Draper 
in Florida, notice came that my homeroom teacher for 
grade six would be Mrs. Olinski. Unless she proved to be 
someone who had changed her name because of marriage or 
some other legal procedure, she would be new to Epiphany 
Middle School. I hoped she was. Having a teacher who didn’t 
know I had an older brother would be a welcome change. 

There is nothing wrong with Lucas, and that is what is 
wrong with him. He is a genius, a star athlete, and is always 
doing something wonderful and/or record setting. Half the 
population of Epiphany is convinced that Luke Potter will 

62 


become so famous that his name will become a noun like 
Kleenex or Coke. The other half is convinced that Luke 
Potter will become a verb like Xerox or fax. And if someday, 
someone says, "Luke me that information, please," that infor- 
mation will be organized, memorized, and set to music. 

Luke is six years older than I. He is in college now, but 
that has not put an end to his reputation. He has become a 
myth like Paul Bunyan or Davy Crockett. Because my name 
is Potter but not Lucas, I have been a disappointment to 
every one of my teachers during my previous six years— 
kindergarten counts. 

The bus swung through the winding streets of The 
Farm, the subdivision that was made out of the Sillington 
place. The last of the Sillington sisters died and left their 
land to Clarion College. The college didn't want a farm, so 
it sold all the surrounding land to a developer who put in 
roads, sidewalks, and sewers, divided it up into lots, and 
sold it to builders. Every subdivision has a name. They 
named this one The Farm. It is no more a farm than the 
Aquarium at Epcot is the Atlantic. 

None of the historical residents of Epiphany liked the 
idea of having the Sillington place parceled off for a subdi- 
vision. My parents, for example, hated it. My mother says 
that if people want to live in a place where every tree and 
shrub is put in place by a landscape architect, why don't 
they go live in a theme park? Mother avoids the subdivision 
as if it were a toxic waste dump. She refers to the people 
who live in The Farm as them. In her mind, there is a big dif- 
ference between them and ms, between living on a farm and 
living in The Farm. To them farming is a lifestyle not a liveli- 
hood. The fact that milk comes from cows has probably oc- 
curred to them , but they prefer to think of it as recycled grass. 

63 



The way F see it, the difference between farmers and 
suburbanites is the difference in the way we feel about 
dirt. To them, the earth is something to be respected and 
preserved, but dirt gets no respect. A farmer likes dirt. 
Suburbanites like to get rid of it. Dirt is the working layer of 
earth, and dealing with dirt is as much a part of farm life as 
dealing with manure: Neither is user-friendly but both are 
necessary. 

When the bus picked up the last passengers from the 
last stop in The Farm, 1 lifted my leg off my backpack. My 
foot had fallen asleep, and it felt heavy as I lowered it. I 
rested it on the floor and allowed the pinpricks of blood to 
tease their way back up my leg. I shook my leg a little— not 
wanting to draw attention to myself— and turned my back 
to the aisle and gazed out the window. I am very good at 
gazing. 1 am also very good at listening. Gazing and listen- 
ing are all right for church, but they sure kill a lot of con- 
versations. 

Instead of making its way back to the state road that 
parallels the lake, the bus took a left turn and started down 
Gramercy Road, the road that borders The Farm and the 
last within the two-mile radius that allows free bus trans- 
portation. Was I the only one who noticed that the bus was 
making an unscheduled stop? The only house there is the 
Sillington place. No one lives there. The house, which was 
given to the college along with the farm, was in a state of 
disrepair, and the college wanted to tear it down, but since 
it was the oldest farmhouse in Clarion County, it was saved 
by that same group that saved the schoolhouse. It is a huge 
old farmhouse that has had so many add-ons it looks like a 
cluster of second thoughts. About a hundred years ago, 
someone added a wraparound porch with enough ginger- 


bread trim to look like a lace collar. The main feature of the 
first floor is the dining room, which stretches from the front 
of the house to the back because in the days when the 
Sillington place was a working farm, Mrs. Sillington used to 
feed all the itinerant farmhands breakfast and supper. They 
ate at long trestle tables that stretched the length of the 
room. There is a picture in the museum. When the 
Sillingtons first settled in Clarion County, before there was 
a state road parallel to the lake, they owned all the land 
down to the waters edge. The house itself is perched atop a 
knoll, and from the upstairs windows you get a good view 
of the lake. 

I continued to stare out the window as the bus rolled 
down Gramercy Road. The Sillington house came into 
view. Standing at the edge of the drive was a man and a kid. 
The man was wearing a long navy blue apron and a white 
turban. A turban. A white turban. Like an illustration from 
The Arabian Nights. Equally strange: The kid was wearing 
shorts and knee socks. No one in Epiphany wears shorts on 
the first day of school. Even if it is ninety- five degrees in the 
shade— and sometimes it is— -no one wears shorts on the 
first day of school. And no one— ever— wears knee socks 
with shorts. No one. Ever. 

The kid was holding a leather book bag. Ever since 
backpacks were invented, no one— ever— in the entire 
school system, grades K through twelve, carries a book bag, 
especially a leather one. 

The kid boarded the bus, the dark man wearing the long 
apron waved, and the kid stopped at the top of the steps and 
waved back. Even first graders on the first day of school 
don't do that. 

The kid started making his way to the back of the bus. 


64 


65 



Before I could resume my seat-occupied sprawl, the kid was 
standing in the aisle next to my seat. 

"Is this seat occupied?" he asked. 

No one ever asks. They just stand in the aisle until you 
move and make room for them. Even if he had asked if the 
seat was taken instead of asking if it was occupied, I could have 
told that he had a British accent. He didn't look British. His 
skin was the color of strong coffee with skim milk— not 
cream— added,- the undertones were decidedly gray. His lips 
were the color of a day-old bruise. He had more hair than 
you would think a single skull could hold. His hair— blue- 
black, thick and straight— did not have the hard sheen of the 
hair of a Chinese or Japanese but had the soft look of fabric. 

"Julian Singh," he said, extending his hand. No one 
(a) introduces himself and then (b) extends his hand to be 
shaken while (c) wearing shorts and (d) knee socks and (e) 
holding a genuine leather book bag on (f) the first day of 
school. 

I extended my hand. "Ethan Potter," I said. I did not 
smile, How could I? For a single moment of neglect, 1 would 
be stuck with having this kid as a bus partner for the rest of 
the school year. 

I didn't want to set up any expectations. 1 wanted to ig- 
nore Julian Singh for the rest of the ride, and I managed to 
say nothing until the bus had turned left off Gramercy and 
was back on Highway 32, but then curiosity got the best of 
me. "Did you buy the Sillington house?" I asked. 

"Yes," Julian replied. 'The purchase was completed sev- 
eral weeks ago. There were quite a few delays in arranging 
the permits." 

"Permits?" I asked. 


'Yes. Permits. Father is converting Sillington House into 
a B and B." 

"A B and B?" 

Yes. A bed and breakfast inn. Rather like a small hotel. 
Except we will not be responsible for dinners, and thus we 
will support only a limited menu. Actually, the kitchen in 
Sillington House is quite remarkable. It is as large as many 
full-service restaurant kitchens. We must make Sillington 
House handicap accessible before we are ready for occu- 
pancy. Mrs: Gershom was most helpful in getting permits 
for the conversion." 

"I'll bet she was," I said. "Is your father a cook?" 

"Yes." Julian smiled. "A chef. He was chef on board the 
Skylark, the cruise ship. Father decided that we needed to 
settle down. He has always wanted to own an inn, so he 
purchased Sillington House. That is what we will call it." 

"That is what it has always been called." 

"Yes. So Mrs. Gershom informed us. Father believes that 
with the college nearby, many visiting parents will welcome 
such a place." 

"Indeed," I said. I don't think I ever said that word be- 
fore. What is there about an English accent that makes peo- 
ple seem more intelligent than they maybe are? And was it 
catchy? 

I turned to the window and rested my forehead against 
the pane. How did he come by his English accent? Where 
did he go to school before? Was he really unaware of being 
weird? How did he get to be so weird? But enough was 
enough. If I didn't pocket my curiosity, I would be giving 
away more than a bus seat. 

When the bus stopped, in a feeble attempt to postpone 


66 


67 



the inevitable, I pretended to be looking for something. 
Mrs. Korshak waited, watching in her rearview mirror. At 
last after everyone else had left, I walked the length of the 
aisle and stood for a second at the top of the steps. 

There was Julian Singh waiting for me. 

I knew he would be. 

Julian said, "I am assigned to Mrs. Olinski, Room 
Twelve. Are you nearby?" 

"1 guess so," I replied, holding up my room assignment 
notice. 

"What a stroke of luck," Julian said. 

"Indeed," I replied. 

Mrs. Olinski was the first teacher Epiphany ever had who 
taught from a wheelchair. 

She sat, waiting, until we were all seated. Then she in- 
troduced herself. "I am Mrs. Olinski. I am one of those peo- 
ple who gets to use all those good parking spaces at the 
mall." She turned toward the blackboard and wrote in big, 
block letters: 

MRS. OLINSKI 
PARAPLEGIC 

As she wrote paraplegic, Mrs. Olinski spelled it out, 
"P-A-R-A-P-L-E-G-I-C. It means that I am paralyzed from the 
waist down." Her voice was steady, but I noticed that her 
hands were not. The O of Olinski was not round or smooth 
but nervous. I don't know what made me look at Julian 
Singh at that moment, but I did. He sat upright in his chair, 
not looking at Mrs. Olinski or the blackboard but staring 
into the middle distance, as if looking at the word paraplegic 
or the paraplegic herself was too painful. 


Mrs. Olinski told us that she had become paralyzed in 
an automobile accident. Confined to a wheelchair as she 
was, she could not reach the top portion of the blackboard, 
so, stretch though she would, the words were written in the 
middle of the board— eye level for most standing sixth 
graders. 

Hamilton Knapp, who had taken a seat in the very last 
row, farthest from the door, stood up and said, "Excuse me, 
Mrs. Olinski, but I can't see what you've written. Could you 
write a little higher on the blackboard, please?" 

Mrs. Olinski smiled. "Not at the moment," she said. 

Ham sat down and said, "Sorry." She didn't mean that 
smile, and Ham Knapp didn't mean that "sorry." 

The remainder of the morning was taken up with book- 
keeping matters such as passing out supplies and assigning 
seats. We were seated in alphabetical order, and as luck 
would have it, Hani Knapp ended up way back in the room, 
in the very seat he had chosen for himself. 

Nadia Diamondstein was seated three rows over and 
two rows forward. I could see her red hair. Nadia and I were 
almost related. This past summer, her grandfather had mar- 
ried my grandmother. In August when I visited them, Nadia 
was visiting her father. We often walked the beach together. 
And one day after a storm, we rescued a batch of hatchling 
turtles and took them out to sea. 

The light from the window shone on Nadia's side of the 
room. When she moved her head, the morning light caught 
in her hair the way the sun had when she turned her back to 
the ocean. Fringes of her hair framed her face in a halo. 
Whenever that halo effect happened, I wanted to stare at 
her until the sunlight stopped, but my heart stopped before 
the light did. Then there was a period during my vacation 


68 


69 



when Nadia chose not to walk with her father and me. I 
waited for her to catch up, and when I did, she slowed 
down, and I missed seeing the light in her hair. 1 never told 
Nadia how much I liked seeing the halo the sunlight made 
of her hair. Sometimes silence is a habit that hurts. 

Noah Gershom sat in back of Michael Froelich and in 
front of Hamilton Knapp. His father is our family dentist. 
His mother sells houses— a lot of them in The Farm-— and 
for reasons too complicated to tell, Noah Gershom was best 
man at my grandmother Drapers wedding early last sum- 
mer. It was pretty funny the way it happened, but my 
mother, who was maid of honor, was not amused. She can- 
not forgive Mrs. Gershom for selling houses at The Farm. I 
think she would change dentists if there were another one 
as good in Epiphany. Potters have always taken good care of 
their land and their teeth. 

Julian Singh sat in the row to my right and two seats 
back. 

At lunchtime, I sat on the end of the bench. Noah took 
a seat next to me. Nadia came from the food line carrying 
her tray and found no vacant seat at any of the girls' tables, 
so she sat next to Noah. Julian, who had brought his lunch, 
was seated at a table at the far end of the room, all alone. He 
finished eating and left the cafeteria without waiting for the 
bell or asking permission. When Mrs. Olinski saw him 
leave, she followed. She must have wanted to tell him the 
rules without calling him out to embarrass him. It took her 
a while to maneuver her wheelchair between the tables, so 
Julian had a head start. Shortly after Mrs. Olinski made her 
way through the door, the bell did ring, and we all left, and 


were just behind Mrs. Olinski as she made her way down 
the hall. 

When we entered the classroom, we saw that someone 
had erased PARAPLEGIC and written CRIPPLE instead. Julian 
was the only person in the room. He was facing the black- 
board, holding an eraser. He turned around, looking startled 
when he saw us file in, led by Mrs. Olinski in her wheel- 
chair. 

Mrs. Olinski approached him wordlessly. She held out 
her hand, and Julian silently handed over the eraser. Mrs. 
Olinski turned from him to the blackboard and slowly and 
deliberately erased the word CRIPPLE. 

The question was: Had Julian erased PARAPLEGIC, or 
was he in the process of erasing CRIPPLE? I glanced back at 
Hamilton Knapp and saw him exchange a look and a slight 
smile with Michael Froelich, and I knew the answer. 

Julian Singh quickly took the trophy for being the 
strangest person to ride the bus. It took only two days for 
the other kids to make his life miserable. They stuck their 
feet into the aisle of the bus to trip him as he made his way 
toward the back, but even though he seemed to have his 
eyes focused straight ahead, he managed to stop just short 
of the protruding feet and say in his perfect British accent, 
"Beg your pardon. Would you mind?" And he would pa- 
tiently wait in the aisle until they pulled their legs in. They 
had to pull their legs in because Mrs. Korshak would not 
start the bus rolling until everyone was seated. When they 
tried again, they met with the same result. Again. The same. 

No normal person would continue to be cheerful and 
wear short pants. 


70 


71 



I knew what they would do next. And sure as God made 
green apples, they did. 

Their next form of torment was to repeat whatever 
Julian said in an exaggerated imitation of his accent. They 
tossed I say and beg your pahdon front to back and across the 
aisle. Julian knew that he was the butt of their jokes, and I 
could tell that he cared, for I could see his cheeks glow red. 
But he said nothing, and kept his distance, or whatever dis- 
tance he could manage on a crowded bus. 

I still looked out the window during the ride to and from 
school and never spoke beyond answering "Hi" to his cheer- 
ful "Good morning." I always managed to delay getting off 
the bus long enough so that I would be last. I stood at the 
top of the stairs long enough to spot Julian waiting for me 
but not long enough to irritate Mrs. Korshak. It took a full 
week before Julian took the hint that I did not choose to 
walk with him from the bus to the building. 

About the third day that Julian started off for class with- 
out waiting for me, I stood at the top of the stairs of the bus, 
checking to see if he was gone and spotted Michael Froelich 
waiting just inside the schoolyard fence by the side of the 
gate where we entered. As soon as Julian was clear of the 
other kids, I saw Froelich get into a crouch and I knew what 
was coming. 

I ran down the bus steps and hooked my arm through 
Julian's and began walking rapidly toward the school. Julian 
hardly had time to react before we were at the gate. I held 
onto Julian, blocking him from Michael Froelich. 

From the foot of the schoolhouse stairs, Hamilton 
Knapp came barreling toward us. He grabbed Julian's book 
bag and ran with it to a tree beyond the school fence. My 
saving him from Froelich had slowed his chasing Knapp. He 


disentangled his arm and started toward Ham, but now his 
way was blocked by Michael, running backward, waving his 
arms like a guard in a game of basketball. 

Julian didn't call for help. He didn't call out at all. Not 
even with a begging look in his eyes did he ask for help. 
Julian, who proved to be stronger and quicker than I would 
have guessed, escaped, ran to Ham, and managed to retrieve 
his book bag after a serious tug-of-war, but not before Ham 
Knapp had managed to write "I am a ass" with a black felt 
tip pen. 

No one said anything about the incident. During the day, 
Julian put his book bag with the written side against the wall 
of his cubby, and on the way home that evening, he kept the 
written side of his book bag against his leg. I knew that the 
pen Ham used would leave permanent marks on leather. 

The following morning Julian waited at the bus stop, 
still wearing short pants and knee socks. It was really the 
knee socks that did it. Short pants, tube socks, and Reeboks 
would have been a little off-center but not weird. He 
boarded the bus, waved to his father, and said "Good morn- 
ing" as he took his seat. 

Between a and ass, he had squeezed in a p. And in the 
space beneath that, he had changed the message. His book 
bag now read: 

lama passenger 
on Spaceship Earth 

A lightened ring in the leather around the first four syllables 
where someone had made several attempts to erase the writ- 
ing looked like a halo. 

I admired that halo. I guess I like halos. 


72 


73 



Following the book bag incident, things on the bus 
cooled down, and so did the weather. Julian began to wear 
long pants— corduroys. I wondered if he even owned a pair 
of jeans. 

The time of year had come when the after-school hours 
were growing shorter and shorter, and I had pumpkins to at- 
tend to. Every Saturday morning from June until mid- 
November, I went with Mother to the Farmers' Market and 
helped her sell her fresh produce and free range eggs. In 
September and October we sold a lot of pumpkins. Mother 
paid me, and I saved almost all of it. 

I was the son who was scheduled to inherit the farm be- 
cause Luke was scheduled for greater things. I knew that as 
soon as I announced to my family what 1 wanted to do, I 
would have to be prepared to pay my own way. 

There was no one in Epiphany to whom I could tell my 
plans. No one in Epiphany would believe that Ethan Potter 
wanted to go to New York City to work in the theater. 1 didn't 
want to be an actor. I wanted to design costumes or stage 
sets, but I could not tell anyone. In mental mileage, 
Epiphany, New York, is farther from New York City, New 
York, than the road mileage from New York to Hollywood. 

Last summer Nadia Diamondstein's father took us to see 
The Phantom of the Opera. I had seen high school plays and 
plays that Clarion U. had put on, but I had never seen some- 
thing like that. When that chandelier came down from the 
ceiling, my throat went dry. No one I knew was sitting by 
me, and I squeezed the arms of my chair to keep myself 
from getting up to cheer. 1 had seen football fans act the 
way I felt. I dream about that show, f bought a souvenir 
booklet that cost ten dollars, and I had looked at it so often 


that I was wearing the gloss off its pages. Someday I'm 
going to design costumes for a show like that. 

But first I had to harvest pumpkins. 

On the third Saturday after school began, Julian and his 
father appeared at market. I saw them first from a distance. 
They did not stand out in that crowd because the Clarion 
County Farmers' Market attracts a lot of people from the 
college, and the college in turn attracts a lot of dark-skinned 
people. Julian's father was carrying a basket over his arm. A 
lot of the college people and suburbanites believe it is the 
ecological thing to do. I saw Julian pointing me out to his 
father before they made their way to our booth. 

Julian introduced his father to both Mother and me. Mr. 
Singh sang the praises of the quality of the goods at the 
market. (Everyone does. There is a rule that you cannot sell 
anything at the market that you do not grow or make your- 
self.) He said that as soon as his B and B opened for busi- 
ness, he would become a regular customer. 

When they left, Mother asked about them. She had 
never before expressed a friendly interest in the fate of the 
Sillington house. 1 told her as much as I knew. 

On the following Saturday, Julian and his father came to 
our booth again. Mr. Singh took forever to select four 
pumpkins from the $2.50 pile. They were not very big, but 
they were so similar in shape and size that they looked like 
clones. Julian handed me a ten- dollar bill. I hated that. I 
don't know why I hate taking money from someone my age 
even though it isn't charity. I took the money, which was 
folded in half, and said, "Thank you." A lot of the booth op- 
erators say, "Have a nice day." I never do. Mother never does 


74 


75 



either. Sometimes she'll say, "Enjoy," but never "Have a nice 
day." Except for Uncle Lew who was in politics, Potters are 
famous for not saying anything they don't mean. 

I waited until Julian and his father were on the far side 
of the next booth before I unfolded the ten-dollar bill. A 
small Post-it note was attached inside the fold. I glanced at 
it, couldn't understand it, looked at it harder, and decided to 
pocket the money with the note instead of putting it in the 
cashbox. I'd make it up with Mother. 

Business was brisk the entire morning, and that was 
good. It meant that there would be fewer pumpkins to re- 
load. I didn't have a chance to give Julian's note a second 
glance or a second thought. Well, maybe I did give it a sec- 
ond thought but not a third and not for long. 

At home I waited until I was alone in my room before 
taking the ten-dollar bill from my pocket. I peeled the Post- 
it from inside the fold. 

Alices Adventures in Wonderland 
Chapter VII Title 

1 found the book on the shelf in the living room and car- 
ried it upstairs. I closed my bedroom door, sat on the edge 
of my bed, and turned the pages until I came to Chapter 
VII, the chapter called "A Mad Tea Party." 

This was obviously an invitation. The strangest I had 
ever received. I not only had never been invited to a tea 
party before but had never before been invited to a party 
where I was not told the time and the place. Either the mys- 
tery would clear up, or it wouldn't. Either way, I wouldn't 
give it a second thought or discuss it with anyone. 

Including Julian Singh. 

Having established my habit of not speaking to Julian 


on the bus, it was easy to avoid talking about the message in 
the ten-dollar bill. And, to his credit, Julian gave no hint— 
no secret smiles or glances out of the corner of his eye— to 
indicate that he was waiting for a response. Instead, he 
boarded the bus, walked to the back, said "Good morning" 
just as he always did and said nothing for the rest of the 
way. And he did not wait for me at the foot of the bus steps. 

I once again managed to be the last one off the bus. As 
I picked up my backpack, I found a Post-it note attached to 
the underside of the left shoulder strap. I pulled it off and 
read it. 

Tea Time is always 4.00 P.M, 

World Atlas 
Map4:D-t6 

I put it in my shirt pocket. 

Our class would be in the school media center after 
lunch. We were allowed to browse for the first fifteen min- 
utes. I found the atlas. Map 4 was New York State. D-16 of 
Map 4 was Clarion County. On the page facing Map 4 was 
a drawing of a house with a lacy wraparound porch. The ad- 
dress, 9424 Gramercy Road, was written beneath it. I took 
the drawing from the book and put it in my shirt pocket 
with the other two notes. I now knew the what, the where, 
and part of the when. I still didn't know the date. 

As I returned to my study table, I passed Nadia 
Diamondstein among the stacks. She was in the fiction sec- 
tion, removing a book from the D's. D for Dodejson, Lewis 
Carroll's real name. I watched Nadia quickly leaf through 
the book she held in her hand, then go check it out. It was 
Alice's Adventures in Wonderland. 

That evening as 1 was undressing, I removed the notes 


76 


77 



from my shirt pocket. Behind the Post-its and the small 
sketch of the Sillington House there was a fourth piece of 
paper: a small page from a pocket calendar. The month of 
October. The fourteenth was circled. Now I knew every- 
thing I needed to know except how Julian had slipped that 
into my pocket. 

For the first time since I started school— no, even longer 
than that— for the first time ever, I was looking forward to 
a party. And 1 knew that part of the reason I was looking for- 
ward to it was because Julian had not made it public. 
Whenever someone makes out a guest list, the people not 
on it become officially uninvited, and that makes them the 
enemies of the invited. Guest lists are just a way of choos- 
ing sides. The way Julian had done the inviting, I didn't 
know who else was coming— although I strongly suspected 
that Nadia Diamondstein would be, and that thought did 
not displease me. 

1 wondered if I should bring a gift. It was always better 
to bring something. I didn't know what. I suspected that 
sports equipment was out. Books: He probably had as many 
books as the library. Video game? Wrong. Clothes: NO! 
Then, when I was in the shower, a word dropped from the 
showerhead. Puzzle. That was it. That was exactly it. A puz- 
zle would be the perfect present for Julian Singh. The video 
store at the mall had dozens of different puzzles that were 
not electronic. I had seen three-dimensional puzzles and 
jigsaw puzzles that had a different picture printed on either 
side. 

I didn't want to tell anyone that I was going to a party. 
A tea party of all things. 1 hardly believed it myself. I needed 
a way to get to the mall, so on the Saturday of the party, I 
asked Mother to please drop me off at the mall on the way 


home from market. She asked why, as 1 knew she would, 
and I told her that I had to buy a present for a party I was 
going to later that afternoon. Mother was not pleased. She 
liked to get home right after market so that we could unload 
the truck and straighten out the accounts. She said alt 
right— not gladly— and told me that she would wait in the 
truck while 1 made my purchase. 

Why couldn't she come into the mall and browse like a 
normal woman? Why? Because she knew there was no bet- 
ter way to get me to hurry. 

I hopped down from the truck and ran to the video 
game store. As luck would have it, no salesperson pounced 
on me the minute I entered. If I had been there to browse, 
not buy, they would have. Now, I had to practically beg for 
attention. High on top of the shelves stocked with closed 
cartons of games of every sort was a display of jigsaw puz- 
zles. There were picture puzzles of waterfalls, 1 ,000 pieces. 
There was another one that was a painting of water lilies 
done in a very loose way. Still another had a picture of a wa- 
terfall on one side and a picture of a koala bear on the other. 
One was a totally white circle. That would be tough be- 
cause there would be no pattern to help a person line up the 
pieces. I decided on that one. Two salesclerks were standing 
at one end of the counter talking. I walked toward them and 
had to say "Excuse me" twice. I pointed to the puzzle 1 
wanted and said 1 would like it gift wrapped. 

"That's number four-sixty- two. We're all out." 

"Then why do you have it on display?" 

"It's very popular. We're expecting another shipment 
next week." 

"I need it today," I said. "It's all right with me if you sell 
me the sample." 


78 


79 



"I can't." 

"Why? I don't need a discount or anything just because 
it's the display. I'll pay full price." 

The clerk said, 'The models are glued together, see, and 
pasted on a board. So how else do you think they stay up?" 

I looked around. "Then I'll take the one that has two dif- 
ferent pictures. The one next to the all-white one." 

"We're out of that one, too." 

"Could you please check your stock in the back?" 

"I checked this morning. We don't have it. We have the 
heart-shaped one in stock." 

I looked it over. Instead of a circle, it was shaped like a 
heart. It was all pink except for a small red heart within the 
large pink one. Although it wouldn't be quite as difficult as 
the all-white circle, it, too, would be hard. But it was pink. 
Pink! Even on Valentine's Day, for a Valentine's Day party, I 
wouldn't consider giving a pink heart to another guy. "Ill 
take the water lilies then." 

'That's one of our most popular puzzles,” the clerk said. 
"It's a reproduction of a famous painting by an impressionis- 
tic French artist who was famous." 

"Does that mean you are out of it, too?" 

'"Fraidso." 

I thought of Mother waiting in the truck. "Okay," I said, 
"give me the heart-shaped one. And gift wrap it, please." 
How could a store that seemed so un-busy be sold out of all 
the good stuff? 

"That will take a while," the clerk said. 

"Can you hurry? Please?" 

"Not if you want me to do a good job." 

"Medium," I said. "Can you do a medium job in a hurry?" 

The salesclerk smiled and called to her fellow worker. 

80 


She asked him to do the gift wrap as she rang up the sale. 
Then while we both waited, she asked, "Is that a present for 
your girlfriend?" 

I knew it. I knew it. My choice was not half wrong,- it 
was all wrong. I was on the verge of asking her to take it 
back and give me a refund when the clerk emerged from the 
back room carrying the puzzle box all wrapped in pink 
paper. 1 thought I would die. Then I thought of Mother 
waiting in the truck and asked for a bag to carry it in. 

Mother folded the newspaper she was reading. She 
turned the key in the ignition even before she asked, "What 
did you get?" 

"A puzzle." 

"Good idea," she replied. 

"Yeah, about twenty minutes ago, I thought so, too." 

"By the way, where is this party?" 

"The Sillington house." 

"Well," Mother said, "I'll bet you'll have good food. I 
hear that Mr. Singh is a wonderful cook." 

"I don't guess I'll be finding that out. I'm only going for 
tea." 

"For tea?" Mother asked, a broad smile breaking across 
her face. “Tea?” she repeated. 

I wished I could bite off my tongue. How in the world 
had I let that piece of information escape? "Yes," I said. Tor 
tea. It's a tea party, and tea is always at four.” 

It would be a good walk— a mile and a half. I could 
cover three miles in forty- five minutes, so I guessed that I 
would need a half hour to make it to the Sillington House 
without a sweat. I was not about to ask Mother to drive me 
there. I put on a plaid flannel shirt and my best sweater. At 

81 



the last minute, I put on a necktie. I don't know why I did, 
and I didn't want to think about it. 

Nadia and Julian were on the front porch. They were 
bending over a small ball of fur. It was a puppy. 

"She is Gingers child/' Nadia explained. 

"Neat," I replied. I hated saying Neat. Nadia's red hair in 
the autumn light made me forget not to say it. 

Mr. Singh came out onto the porch, and Julian made a 
formal introduction. We shook hands. "How do you like 
Julian's present from Nadia?" he asked. 

I said "awesome" and immediately wished I hadn't. 

Mr. Singh held his hand over his brow to make a sunshade 
and looked into the distance. "That looks like our other guest. 
Let us welcome him." Then he turned to me and Nadia and 
asked if we would please excuse him and Julian for a minute. 

Nadia and I stood there on the front porch and said 
nothing to each other. No one would guess that we were al- 
most relatives. We watched Noah Gershom get out of the 
car and start walking up the brick path to the house. In one 
hand he held a beautifully wrapped present. I watched Mr. 
Singh with his white turban and long blue apron over his 
trousers and Julian at his side walk down the path to greet 
him. Silhouetted against the sky, they looked like a travel 
poster for a distant land. 

Mr. Singh stepped aside to allow Julian and Noah to 
precede him up the walk. 

Julian took Noah's gift and said, "I believe you know 
everyone here except Alice." 

"Who's Alice?" Noah asked. 

Nadia answered. "She is Ginger's daughter. Ginger is my 
dog, and I have given Julian one of her puppies." 


"Did you ask if Julian can have a pet?" Noah asked. 

"No," she replied. 

"I've never heard of someone giving someone a pet for a 
present without permission." 

"I could not believe that anyone would not want one of 
Ginger's puppies." 

"What if Julian has an allergy?" 

"If Julian had an allergy— which he does not— he would 
still want one of Ginger's pups. Ginger is a genius." She 
looked at me and added, "She is a hybrid genius of unknown 
I.Q.," and I knew that she was acknowledging our conversa- 
tion of last summer. 

"Oh," Noah said. He hit his forehead with the palm of 
his hand. "Of course. Of course. I almost forgot. Ginger is 
the dog that invented E = me 2 ." 

"E = me 2 was not invented. It was discovered, and 
Einstein discovered it. Ginger is a genius of her genus. She 
is the best there is of Canis familiaris, and Alice is the best of 
her litter." 

"Alice,” Noah repeated. "Who named her that?" 

"I did," Nadia said. "I thought Julian would like the name 
because he sent me the invitation to tea in the book, Alice's 
Adventures in Wonderland." 

"I've never heard of someone giving someone a pet for a 
present without permission and then choosing that pet's 
name without even asking." 

Nadia said, "Well, Noah, now you have. In a single af- 
ternoon you have heard of both.” 

The large center hall of the Sillington house had a stair- 
case that curved upward like a stretch of DNA. To the right 


82 


83 



of the hall was a living room that had a huge fireplace on 
the end wall; there was no furniture in the room, and the 
wallpaper was peeling from the walls. On the left of the 
center hall was the long dining room. I did not remember its 
having a fireplace, but it did. I was drawn into the room by 
the large, framed poster hanging over the fireplace mantel. 

EXTRAORDINAIRE 

SlMONETTA 

Chanteuse 

Taking up most of the space in the poster was a full-length 
picture of a smiling, dark-haired woman in a green satin 
gown. At the bottom was the information; 

Appearing Nightly 
November i 4—29 
The Stardust Room 

Julian came up behind me. "That is my mother,” he said. 

"Your mother is a chanteuse?" 

"Yes, she was a chanteuse," he said, pronouncing it 
shawn-tewt. 

"What does a shawn-tewz do?" 

"She sings." 

"I saw The Phantom of the Opera last summer. There was a 
wonderful chanteuse in that show." 

Julian smiled but said nothing. 

"Has she retired?" I asked. 

"No," he said. "She died.” 

"Oh," I said, embarrassed. "I'm sorry." 

Julian looked up at the poster. 'That poster is quite old. 


From before my birth. The Stardust Room mentioned there 
is on a cruise ship. Mother performed there and on other 
cruise ships. Before it was necessary for me to start school, I 
used to travel with Mother and Father. Then I went to 
boarding school in the north of England in the fall and win- 
ter and traveled with them during one of the summer 
months. Until this year." 

"Are you an alien?" I asked. 

"Actually, no," he said. "Mother was an American by 
birth,- Father is by naturalization. I was born on the high 
seas. That makes me American." 

"As American as apple pie," I said. 

Julian smiled. "Not quite," he said. "Let us say that I am 
as American as pizza pie. I did not originate here, but I am 
here to stay." He extended his arm in the direction of Nadia 
and Noah and took a small step back so that I could pass in 
front of him. "I think we must join our other guests," he said. 
"Please," he said. I crossed in front of him, and as I did so, I 
felt that I Was crossing from stage right to stage left and 
wearing a tuxedo, and I did not mind the feeling at all. 

The long trestle tables that are in the picture in the his- 
tory museum were gone. The dining room was now fur- 
nished with two tables-for- two, three tables- for- four, and 
one larger table at the far end toward the back of the house. 
Around the tables were an assortment of chairs, none of 
which matched but seemed to. 

The tea was very hot, so we could not gulp it down. We 
sat at the four sides of a table- for- four and slowly began not 
to hurry. We sipped the tea and ate small sandwiches that 
Mr. Singh brought out on a large round tray. Later he 
brought a three-tiered tray of small pastries. They were de- 


84 


85 



licious, and after finishing hers, Nadia licked her forefinger 
and with it, picked up the crumbs from her plate. She licked 
her finger clean so delicately that not even Miss Manners 
would call it bad. 

I, who always preferred silence to speaking, actually 
started the talking. I asked, "How many eighth graders does 
it take to screw in a lightbulb?" 

Noah replied, "How many?" 

I answered, "Only one. They all know how to screw up." 

Everyone laughed. 

Noah asked, "Where did you hear that one?" 

“I made it up," I confessed. I had made that joke up when 
lightbulb jokes were popular, but I had never told it to any- 
one before. 1 was so pleased with their response to a joke I 
made up that I told them one I had thought of the day Ham 
Knapp and Mike Froelich had attacked Julians book bag. 

"What is the difference between a pig sty and the sixth 
grade?" I asked. 

Julian said, "1 don't know. What is the difference?" 

"In a pig sty an ass is a ham." 

Julian quietly said thank you, and no one asked why. 

After the tea was gone and the cakes were eaten, Julian 
opened his presents. Noah's first. A bottle of black, black 
ink, a pen and a pad of paper marked with double and sin- 
gle lines, and a paperback book. 

"For calligraphy," Noah explained. 'The ink is called 
India ink. I thought that would be appropriate." 

Julian laughed. "Yes, indeed it is." (Indeed again.) 
"Calligraphy is a skill I have always wanted to acquire." 

"I can teach you," Noah said. 


Julian flashed his most dazzling smile at Noah. "I would 
appreciate that very much," he said. 

"Consider it done," Noah replied. 

Nadia said, "I have always wanted to write like that. You 
can teach me, too." 

"Do you have the pen?" he asked. 

"I will get one." Nadia looked over at me. "Ethan, I think 
you will feel very left out if you do not get one, too." 

"1 will make each of you a list of what you need. I'll make 
the list in calligraphy. Watch me, and it will be your first les- 
son." Noah filled the pen. It was a very long process. "Filling 
the pen is not what you do before you begin. It is the be- 
ginning," he said. "Learn to make a plus sign so that both the 
vertical and horizontal strokes are the same thickness. That 
is your second lesson. You can practice as soon as you buy 
your materials." We waited and watched as Noah wrote out 
the two lists. 

Before Julian opened up my gift, I knew that it was 
going to be just right. And it was. "A puzzle!" Julian ex- 
claimed. "I love puzzles. Let's do it now." 

So without bothering to clear away our cups and 
saucers, we took seats at the larger table toward the back of 
the room. As we began to spread out the pieces of the puz- 
zle, Nadia said, "Just like the Mad Hatter's Tea Party— we all 
moved one place on." 

We worked on the puzzle, each one allowing himself a 
section of the table and the necessary quiet. Then when all 
the pieces were used up, we brought our sections together, 
pushing them left-to-right or right-to-left until they fit 
together. One piece was missing. We looked on the floor 
and around the legs of our chairs but didn't find it. I was 


86 


87 



annoyed with the people who had sold me the puzzle. 
'They've got their nerve selling defective puzzles/' I said. 

"But the box was sealed," Noah said. 

Julian said, "I think Nadia has it in her hair." 

"Do not be ridiculous," Nadia said. "I do not." 

"Oh, yes, you do. I see it. Can you see it?" he asked me 
and Noah. Before we could answer, Julian reached across 
the table and pulled the last piece of puzzle from Nadia's 
hair. He held it up between his thumb and forefinger and 
said, "Dear friends, may I present you with the final solu- 
tion?" He reached down as if to place the piece of puzzle in 
the small lake of brown tabletop near the center of the puz- 
zle. But when he opened his hand, out fell three red-and- 
white- striped mints. "Ah, yes," he said, "I almost forgot our 
after- tea mints. Please help yourselves." We each picked up 
a mint, and Julian said, "I think it's time to wrap this up. 
Ethan," he said, "would you please see if that pesky piece is 
still in the box?" 

I reached down on the floor, opened the box, and there 
it was— the last piece of puzzle. I took it from the box, put 
it in place and said, "I'm impressed." 

And 1 was. And so were we all. 

The party broke up when Mrs. Gershom arrived to take 
Noah home. As Noah stood at the front door saying his 
thank you's, Julian said, "Same time next week. But, please, 
your presence but not presents." 

Noah said, "I've heard that before. As a matter of fact, 
I've put it in writing." 

I left shortly after Noah. The days were getting short, 
and it was dark when I left Sillington House. Mrs. Gershom 


had offered to drive me home, but I wanted to walk. I 
wanted to walk the road between Sillington House and 
mine. I wanted to mark the distance slowly. Something had 
happened at Sillington House. Something made me pull 
sounds out of my silence the way that Julian pulled puzzle 
pieces out of Nadia's hair. 

Had 1 gained something at Sillington House? Or had I 
lost something there? The answer was yes. 

The Monday morning following our tea, Julian boarded 
the bus and said "Good morning" exactly the way he had 
said it every other day. We did not speak again, and when 
the bus came to its final stop, we did not wait for each other 
or walk together into Mrs. Olinski's classroom. That was the 
way I wanted it. And that was the way it remained. 

On Saturday Mother asked me where I was going. I told 
her. She asked me why, and I said we were working on a 
project, and that turned out to be the truth. 

Mr. Singh was stripping old paper off the walls of one of 
the bedrooms, and all of us got involved. Mr. Singh had a 
steamer to loosen the paper from the walls. Noah made a 
contest out of seeing who could pull off the longest strip. 
Working quietly on one side of the window, easing the 
paper off inch by inch, Nadia ended up with a piece that 
was almost as long as the room was tall. She won. 

"What will be my prize?" she asked. 

"Ask Noah," I said. "He has a proven talent for thinking 
of prizes." 

"When will I know my prize?" Nadia asked. 

"Before our meeting is over," Noah said. "I think I need 
some tea to think." 


88 


89 



When we sat down to our afternoon tea, Nadia pro- 
posed that we give ourselves a name. 

I thought it was a good idea and suggested, "The Gang 
of IV. l,V, the Roman numerals." 

Noah said, "No. Nadia gets to choose the name. And 
that is her prize for pulling off the longest strip of wallpaper. 
Besides, I think she already has something in mind." 

"As a matter of fact, I do/' she said. "And swear that as 
my prize, you will accept my choice." 

We said we would. 

"Good," she said. 'Then it is settled. We are The Souls." 

"I agree," I said immediately. 

Noah cocked his head to one side. "I ... like ... it ... 
but ... I think it ought to be The Sillington Souls." ' 

"I did not say that, Noah. 1 said The Souls. Besides, 'Less 
is more."' 

"What does that mean?" Noah asked. "Less is more. Less 
is more what? Or less what is more? What does it mean? 
Less is more." 

Think about it," Nadia said. “If someone hands you a 
card that says that she is President, Clarion National Bank, 
it means more than if she hands you a card that says she is 
First Vice President, Loan Department, Clarion National 
Bank, Epiphany Branch. If you say Michelangelo, it means 
more than Michelangelo Smith, and just plain Leonardo 
means more than Leonardo Jones." 

Noah said, "I don't think you can say just plain and apply 
it to Leonardo." 

Nadia said to Noah, "Noah Gershom, you may be smart 
beyond your years, but you are not wise." 

"All right. All right,” Noah said. "The Souls." He smiled. 
"I like it." 


"Good," I said, looking over at Julian. ''What about you?" 

"I agree. We will be The Souls. Let us shake on it." 

We rested our elbows on the table's edge and reached 
toward the center of the table until our hands clutched. "We 
are now The Souls,” Nadia said. When we released our 
hands, each of us was holding a shiny new penny. 

"Ah, yes," Julian said. "If you'll check the date on the 
coin, you will see they are new— minted in the year The 
Souls was bom." 

One Saturday afternoon, shortly after The Souls was 
bom, as we sat around the table- for- four where we had had 
our tea, I broke the silence by asking— I really don't know 
why— except that it was something I had been thinking 
about, "If you could live one day of your life all over again, 
what day would it be? And why?" 

Nadia said, "I would like to live over the morning my 
father and I helped my grandfather and Margaret rescue the 
turtles that had been blown ashore by the northeaster." She 
explained about the turtles, their life cycle, and our walks 
along the beach up until the morning after the storm. "It was 
like a scavenger hunt. Ethan was there. Do you remember, 
Ethan?" I nodded. "For two whole days, we kept them safe 
in buckets, all covered with wet seaweed. And then 
Margaret, Grandpa Izzy and my dad, Ethan and I drove to 
Marineland. Ethan and I kept the buckets between us in the 
back seat, and the three adults crowded together in the 
front seat. We were crowded, wet, and messy, and it was 
fun." She looked over at me, and smiled. "Even your grand- 
mother laughed at the sight of us as we got out of the car." 
I nodded again. The marine biologist took us out to the 
Sargasso Sea, and allowed us to empty the buckets over the 


90 


91 



edge of the boat. We gave the turtles a lift, and we made it 
possible for them to continue that phase of their life. It was 
a most wonderful day. Remember, Ethan?" 

I remembered. 

Noah said, "I would like to live over the day I was best 
man at a wedding in Century Village that involved four 
grandparents— two of mine and one each of two other 
Souls." 

Noah had a knack for telling a story, and all of us 
laughed, even the two of us who already knew the details. 
Nadia, who had not found the details funny before, found 
them funny now. 

Julian, ever polite, asked, "Is it now my turn?" 

Nadia said, "Please." 

Julian picked up a deck of cards. He spoke as he shuf- 
fled. "If I could repeat one day of my life," he said, pushing 
the cards across the table to Noah. "Cut them, please." 
Noah did, and Julian nodded. "1 would choose the time we 
were sailing back to England," he said as he began to deal 
the cards, going round and round. "All during the journey 
from the Mediterranean, Copal, who did close-up magic, 
had been teaching me how to play poker." Julian looked 
over the table and counted the cards— three— at each place. 
Then he slowly dealt another round as he continued talking. 
"Finally on the day we docked at Southampton, the very day 
before I was to start boarding school ..." Julian smiled, laid 
the remaining deck of cards in the middle of the table, and 
said, "Would you mind turning over your cards?" 

We did. I, who was on Julian's left had four two's,- Noah, 
who was next had four three's; Nadia had four four's. Julian 

92 


said, "On the day we docked at Southampton, Gopal said 
something to me ..."Julian turned over two of the top cards 
from the remaining deck: Aces. "On the day we docked, 
Gopal said that I had chops." Julian turned over the next 
two cards: Two more aces. "That day when Gopal told me 
that I had chops, that is the day I would like to live over." 

We applauded. 

"What are chops?" Noah asked. 

"Chops," Julian said, "is to magic what doing scales is to 
a chanteuse. Without it you cannot be a magician, with it 
alone you cannot be an artist." 

Something in Sillington House gave me permission to 
do things I had never done before. Never even thought of 
doing. Something there triggered the unfolding of those 
parts that had been incubating. Things that had lain inside 
me, curled up like the turtle hatchlings newly emerged from 
their eggs, taking time in the dark of their nest to unfurl 
themselves. I told jokes I had never told before. I asked 
questions I had never asked before. When it was my turn to 
tell what day I would like to live over, after Nadia had fin- 
ished, after Noah and Julian had, too, I told mine. 

The Souls listened and were not embarrassed to hear, 
and I was not embarrassed to say, "l would like to live over 
the day of our first tea party. And, look," I added, "every 
Saturday since, I get to do just that." 


93 



4 

M rs. Olinski sat, waiting, until all the members of 
her class were seated. Then she introduced her- 
self. "I am Mrs. Olinski. I am one of those people 
who gets to use all those good parking spaces at the mall." 
She turned toward the blackboard and wrote in big; block 
letters: 

MRS. OLINSKI 
PARAPLEGIC 

As she wrote paraplegic, Mrs. Olinski spelled it out, 
"P-A-R-A-P-L-E-G-I-C. It means that I am paralyzed from the 
waist down." 

Mrs. Olinski had thought about what she would say to 
this, her first sixth -grade class in ten years. She wrote it all 
down, revised, memorized, and rehearsed until she could 
deliver her lines with a light touch. Her voice held steady, 
but her hands did not, and the O of Olinski was the rough 
shape of an oil spill. 

Then a student in the back— Hamilton Knapp— stood 
up. "Excuse me, Mrs. Olinski," he said, hesitating slightly, 
mispronouncing her name. "I can’t see what you've written. 
Could you write a little higher on the blackboard, please?" 


Mrs. Olinski replied, "Not at the moment," and man- 
aged an embarrassed smile. The rest of her prepared re- 
marks flew out of her head. She thought she had thought of 
everything. But here she was with a problem about sight 
lines to the blackboard. Given time, she would figure it out, 
but she wished it had not come up on the very first hour of 
her very first day back. 

After Hamilton Knapp sat down, she laughed nervously. 
"I was about to tell you that being a paraplegic does not 
mean that there is anything wrong with my hearing or my 
eyesight, but I guess well have to figure out what to do 
about the eyesight of those of you who will be seated in the 
back of the room." 

Mrs. Olinski decided that she would write nothing more 
on the blackboard for the rest of the morning but would 
leave what she had already written right there so that she 
could check it out after lunch. She would return before the 
rest of the class, wheel herself to the back of the room while 
it was still empty, and check out the sight lines. 

She took the roll, checking on the spelling and pronun- 
ciation of each child’s name, and passed out general supplies 
and the books for the social studies she would be teaching. 
Finally, she assigned seats in alphabetical order, last names 
first. 

The year of her accident, Mrs. Olinski had had two 
Jennifers in her class. This semester, Jennifer was out of 
fashion, and J-names for boys were in. She had J-names 
from Jared to Julian, including two Jasons. When she re- 
turned from lunch and saw CRIPPLE written on the black- 
board, she knew more than the names had changed. Sixth 
graders had changed. 



 

E than finished answering the four-part question 
about the history of the state of New York. 
"... the first womens rights convention orga- 
nized by Elizabeth Cady Stanton. Auburn was the home 
of Harriet Tubman who ran the underground railroad." 

"That registers six points for the Epiphany Team," 
the commissioner said. There was a spontaneous burst 
of applause from their side of the aisle that was imme- 
diately suppressed by the commissioner. "I must ad- 
monish the audience not to applaud. It is distracting to 
both teams." 

Mrs. Olinski remembered the day that rude ap- 
plause had distracted a performance. Her fourth 
choice had been causing her problems, but it had been 
on the very day when rude applause interrupted a play 
that she had made the fourth and final choice for her 
team. 

 

It was the Saturday afternoon after they became The 
Souls, sometime after they had finished their four o'clock 
tea, when Julian had said, "We must have a project," and 
Noah had asked, "Isn’t peeling wallpaper enough?" 

Julian grinned and said no. He took a small object from 
his pants pocket and kept it hidden in his fist. He rested his 
hands lightly on the edge of the table. 

"And the calligraphy lessons. Aren't they enough?" 
Julian said no again, and Noah asked, "Now what?" 

Nadia said, "I think Julian already has something in mind." 


"Indeed I do." Julian turned his fist over and opened his 
hand. There within his palm was a small ivory monkey, only 
two inches high. He laid it on the table and waited until 
each of The Souls had inspected it thoroughly before say- 
ing, "Gopal gave me this little sculpture. It can do tricks." 
Julian then stood the little figure first on one foot, then the 
other,- one arm, then the other. "You see, this monkey can 
balance on any one of its four limbs." 

Noah asked, "What is that supposed to mean?" 

Ethan replied, "I think it has something to do with Mrs. 
Olinski." 

Julian smiled broadly. "Indeed it does." 

"Mrs. Olinski?" Noah repeated. "Mrs. Olinski? What?" 

"I think that Julian wants us to help her," Ethan ex- 
plained. 

"Help her do what?" Noah asked. 

Nadia said, "Stand on her own two feet. Have you never 
heard that expression, Noah?" 

"Of course, I have heard that expression, but fact: Mrs. 
Olinski cannot stand on her own two feet and further fact: 
she obviously . . Noah's voice trailed off as he understood. 
"I get it," he said. "I get it. It is scary trying to stand on your 
own two feet especially when you don't have a leg to stand 
on, so to speak." 

Julian rubbed the little ivory monkey. "There are some 
in the school who try to get her off balance. Some are in our 
homeroom." 

"We can give her some support," Ethan said. 

"Better than that," Nadia said, "we can give her a lift." 

They all turned to Noah. "What do you suggest?" they 
asked, knowing Noah would have an answer. And he did. 


96 


97 



 

T he commissioner reached into the bowl again. 
He allowed his hand to touch bottom before 
spreading his fingers to pick up the next question. 
"An acronym is defined as a word formed from the 
initial letters of a series of words. For example, 
RADAR is an acronym for RAdio Detecting And 
Ranging. R-A from radio, D from detecting , A from and, 
and R from ranging. Can you give me two more exam- 
ples of acronyms that have entered our language as 
words?" 

Julian Singh's buzzer went off. "Posh and tip," he 
called out. 

 


98 


Julian Narrates 

When Ginger Played Annie’s Sandy 


ft was the Saturday of Thanksgiving weekend that Ethan 
Potter suggested to Nadia Diamondstein that she have 
Ginger play Annies Sandy. I had no idea what he was talk- 
ing about. I knew, of course, that Ginger referred to Nadia's 
beloved and talented dog, so I thought that perhaps Annie's 
Sandy was a video game played by the canine orders. How- 
ever, the word play referred to playing a part in a musical 
show about an orphan named Annie in a show called Annie, 
and Sandy was the name of the dog belonging to the title 
character. Epiphany High School was putting on the play 
for The Holiday Season. Until we moved to Epiphany, I had 
no idea how busy Americans are between Thanksgiving and 
New Year's Day, the time they refer to as The Holiday 
Season. Everyone asks, "Are you ready for the holidays?" 
And then afterward, they ask, "How were your holidays?" 
During the holidays themselves, no one asks about them. 

When Ethan suggested that Nadia have Ginger try out, 
Nadia said, "Ginger does not do Arf." Another remark I did 
not understand. I did not intend to ask. 1 knew that if I 
waited, an explanation would come. It did. 

The play, Annie, is based on an American comic strip 


99 



called "Little Orphan Annie," and when Annies Sandy 
speaks, in the balloon over his head is written Atfi Everyone 
had already been cast for the high school production but 
not the dog Sandy, and Mrs. Reynolds, the play's director, 
had put a notice on the bulletin board that anyone with a 
well-trained dog could try out. 

Ethan said, 'They call that a 'cattle call.'" 

Noah said, "Why would they call it a cattle call, if they 
are asking for dogs?" 

Ethan said, "It's a theatrical saying. It means an open au- 
dition. Even if they mean people, they call it a cattle call." 

"Then what do they call a cattle call?" Noah asked. 

Ethan replied, "A round-up, I guess." He turned to Nadia 
and said, "Ginger's bark will do very well. Besides, she looks a 
lot like Sandy except that her eyeballs aren't blank." (In time I 
came to understand that remark, too. The artist who drew the 
comic strip never drew irises on the eyes of people or dogs.) 

Noah said, There is one other thing." 

Nadia ignored Noah. She said to Ethan, "If I do have 
Ginger try out, she will get the part. Ginger is a genius." 

Noah said, "There is one other thing." 

Nadia turned to Noah and said, "Ginger is a genius. She 
will get the part." 

"Nadia, my dear," Noah insisted, "Sandy is a male, and 
fact: Ginger is a— if you'll excuse the expression— a bitch. 
From everything I've ever learned in health education, 
genes, not genius, determine— if you'll excuse the expres- 
sion— sex. Fact: Unless Ginger visits a plastic surgeon, she 
won't fit the part." 

Nadia said, "Noah, is there any subject in this whole 
world that you do not know more about than every other 
being on this planet?" 


Noah shrugged. "Not every other being on the planet. 
Let’s just say, 'Every other being in this room.' " 

"Do you have a dog?" she asked. 

"No, but ...'' 

"Just answer the question. Do you have a dog?" 

"No, but ..." 

"Just answer the question. Have you ever had a dog?" 

"No, but ..." 

"Just answer the question. Have you ever had a dog?" 
"No." 

Nadia said, "I rest my case." 

Noah would not give up. "Have you ever had allergies 
that kept you from having a dog?" he asked. 

"No." 

"Have you ever had a brother who had allergies that 
kept you from having a dog?" 

"No, I have not and neither have you." 

"Have you ever had a brother?" 

"No." 

"I ... " 

Ethan interrupted. "Getting back to Ginger. You ought 
to let her try out." 

Nadia said, "I shall. She will get the part, and they will 
consider themselves lucky, which they should, because 
Ginger is a genius." 

The bickering between Nadia and Noah no longer 
made me uncomfortable. As a matter of fact, I had begun to 
enjoy it. And so had we all, including Noah and Nadia. 

Once Nadia made her decision to have Ginger try out 
for the part, I told them that in the days when 1 had traveled 
with my parents on the cruise line, I saw a number of animal 
acts. There were not many, for keeping animals on board 


100 


101 



ship is not easy. I explained that wild animals were out of 
the question as were the larger varieties of domestic animal 
such as cow or horse. There was a monkey, once, but it was 
a terrible thief. The monkey whose name was Sapphire (his 
hind quarters were bright blue) would swing down from a 
flagpole or a railing and steal shiny objects like pens or bar- 
rettes or, even worse, jewelry. Sapphire always would drink 
anything that was left unattended in a cup or a glass. As a 
result Sapphire was often drunk and incapable of bladder 
control. Most passengers were not amused, and the captain 
had Sapphire and his owner put off the ship at the next port. 

"Most of the animal acts on board ship involved dogs," I 
explained. "From watching them 1 learned what trainers do." 

So it was that even before the cattle call, The' Souls 
began the intensive training of Ginger. 

I taught each of The Souls how to palm a treat so that 
no one in the audience would notice. First, we taught Ginger 
to respond to Nadia, and then Nadia fused with Ethan and 
then Ethan with Noah, then Noah with me until at last 
Ginger would respond to the treat and not the person. We 
trained Ginger to accept the treat without excessive salivat- 
ing. Most people who are not dog owners, and even many 
who are, do not care very much for a tongue bath. 

Ethan got a copy of the script. In the play, the police- 
man asks, "Is that your dog, little girl?" and Sandy is sup- 
posed to bark. We taught Ginger to bark on cue, and the 
more she did it, the more it sounded like Arfl 

Ginger had learned her lines. Ginger had learned her 
cues. Ginger was a genius. 

Eight dogs, their owners, the entire cast of the play, and 
The Souls attended the dog try-outs. I had thought about 


bringing Alice, but Papa advised against it. He said that a 
daughter should not be in competition with her mother, but 
I think he would have missed her during the times she 
would be at rehearsals. Alice and Papa kept each other com- 
pany when I was at school. Alice had become our early- 
warning system. Every time someone started up the path to 
Sillington House, Alice barked to let us know. We were a lit- 
tle concerned that when we had paying guests, which 
would be soon, this might be a problem. 

One of the eight dogs was quickly eliminated on 
grounds of disobedience. The second had a problem with 
his plumbing, and Mrs. Reynolds was not amused by the 
snickers in the audience or the mess on stage. The next two 
were small, nervous creatures that looked like battery- 
operated plush toys. They did not run in a straight line but 
zigzagged and yipped their way across the stage. Numbers 
five and six were male and did embarrassing things to legs, 
any legs— male or female— that happened to be onstage. 
The two remaining contenders were Ginger and Michael 
Froelich's dog, Arnold. Arnold, a well-behaved yellow 
Labrador retriever, was larger than Ginger and was— quite 
decidedly and obviously— male. 

I wanted Ginger to get the part, not only because she 
belonged to Nadia and not only because she was Alice's 
mother but also because I did not want Michael Froelich to 
have the honor. Since those first weeks at school, I had done 
my best to avoid both Michael Froelich and his friend, 
Hamilton Knapp. 

Arnold tried out before Ginger. Hie girl who was to 
play Annie stood center stage, clapped her hands upon her 
thighs, and Arnold leaped across the stage, placed his paws 
upon Annie's shoulders, and caused her to lean backward. 


102 


103 



She almost fell. Froelich ran across the stage and quickly 
hooked a leash to Arnold's collar and said to Stage -Annie, "I 
promise you that won’t happen again, but it will help if you 
dig your heels in a little." 

Mrs. Reynolds, the drama teacher, said, "Next." 

It was Ginger's turn, and Stage-Annie once again 
clapped her hands on her knees. Nadia quietly whispered, 
"Go, Ginger," gave her a little push on her rump and quickly 
crossed to the other side of the stage behind the backdrop 
and stood in the wings on the opposite side of the stage 
where no one in the audience could see her, but Ginger 
could. In between stood Stage-Annie, holding a treat. 

Privately, before try-outs began, 1 had slipped back- 
stage and taught Stage-Annie how to palm a treat and pass 
it off so that no one in the audience could see. Ginger 
walked across the stage with enthusiasm and dignity and 
quietly nuzzled Stage-Annie's hand before sitting at her 
feet. 

Ginger was in every way clearly superior to every other 
dog there. Even her mixed-breed looks better suited the 
part than Arnolds purebred sleekness. Ginger was first rate. 
Ginger had star quality. Ginger got the part. 

Mrs. Reynolds, the drama coach who was director of the 
play, said, "Ginger will be Annies Sandy, and Arnold will be 
Ginger's understudy." 

We Souls, sitting in the audience, applauded, and Ethan 
stood and yelled, "Bravo! Mrs. Reynolds. Bravol" Ethan had 
always wanted to stand up in a theater and yell Bravo! 

Mrs. Reynolds said, "Who is doing that yelling?" 

Ethan waved his hand and called out, "It's me, Mrs. 
Reynolds. Me. Here. Ethan Potter." 


Mrs. Reynolds shielded her eyes from the footlights to 
see out over the audience. "Ethan Potter?" Still screening her 
eyes, she smiled. "Ethan Potter. I didn't recognize you." I be- 
lieve that she did not recognize him, for the person yelling 
Bravol was Ethan, The Soul— not Ethan, the silent. Then she 
asked, "How is your grandmother, Ethan?" 

"She's fine, Mrs. Reynolds. She got married last sum- 

n 

mer. 

"I heard," Mrs. Reynolds replied. "And how is that big 
brother of yours? How's Lucas?" 

"He's fine, Mrs. Reynolds." 

"Will you tell him I said hello?" 

'Yes, I will." 

"When will you see him again?" 

"He'll be home for Christmas." 

"I hope he'll come see the play," she said. "Will you tell 
him?" 

'Yes, I will." 

Ethan did not say another word until we left the audito- 
rium that day. 

Ginger learned to bark Arf! on cue and quickly won the 
hearts of the entire cast as well as Mrs. Reynolds. Nadia was 
beaming. 

Nadia had kindly passed along training information to 
Froelich and to Stage-Annie, and Arnold's performance im- 
proved to within a shade of Ginger's. It would have been 
better if Arnold had been eliminated altogether. Second 
best can be worse than not-in-the-running. Who knew what 
was happening inside Froelich's head as he trained Arnold. 
Who knew what was happening inside Froelich's head when 


104 


105 



he attended rehearsals— he had to attend them all— and 
had nothing to do except to wait backstage and watch ad- 
miration and affection be heaped on Ginger. That 
amounted to a lot of work for little glory. During the actual 
performances he and Arnold were to stay backstage and out 
of sight— unless something happened to Ginger. Did hav- 
ing Arnold as understudy make Froelich feel like an under- 
dog? 

I was not without worry. 

The main performance was to be on Saturday evening 
before the winter recess. That was when friends and family 
would attend. This event was exciting for Papa and me not 
only because Alice's mother was about to make her dramatic 
debut but also because Sillington House was, too. Mr. and 
Mrs. Diamondstein were flying up from Florida to celebrate 
Christmas with the Potters and would be our first paying 
guests. They planned to arrive in time to see Ginger play 
Annies Sandy. 

Papa had only one of the guest bedrooms ready, but he 
was quite proud of it, and so was I. He hung the bed linen 
out on a clothesline he strung across the backyard so that 
everything would smell of the sweet air that blew off the 
lake. He purchased a beautiful cut glass carafe and matching 
drinking glass and put them on the nightstand by the bed. 
He purchased a poinsettia and put it on the dresser. In the 
closet were the heavy hangers of polished wood— not those 
permanently attached things that you find in cheap motels 
nor the weak wire ones you get from the dry cleaners— that 
Papa had bought in England. We had them all facing the 
same way so that their shadows on the wall looked like a 


computer rendering of an architectural cross section. The 
sink and tub were scrubbed until their whiteness could 
snow-blind. The faucets shone bright enough to use as 
mirrors. 

The Diamondsteins arrived on the Friday afternoon be- 
fore the official start of the school holiday. That was the af- 
ternoon that I and all the other members of the elementary 
and middle schools of Epiphany were to attend a special 
matinee performance of Annie. For the cast it would be 
something more than a full dress rehearsal because of a full 
live audience. 

Everyone at Epiphany Middle School was to be trans- 
ported to the high school by bus. That meant walkers and 
car-poolers were all going by bus so that our usual seating 
arrangement was not in order. I had a window seat. 

Jared Lord had the window seat two rows in front of me. 
Ham Knapp took the seat next to him. Ever since the first 
few weeks of school, when I could not avoid Knapp and his 
friends, 1 did my best to ignore them. But I was never un- 
aware of them. Since I had become a Soul and since Froelich 
had started attending rehearsals, I had become less con- 
cerned about him, but Ham was another matter. 1 was never, 
never unaware of him or any of his friends. Whenever 
Knapp was anywhere nearby, all my senses were on alert. 

Even though it was late December, the sun, pouring in 
through the windows of the bus as it waited in the car park, 
had heated it up like a greenhouse. We were dressed in 
woolens, so we opened the windows before sitting down for 
the ride to the high school. I mention all of this because as 
soon as the bus started out of the car park, the wind coming 


106 


107 



through the open windows of the bus caused a peculiar 
warp in the sound. 

The first word I heard was tranquilizer. It flowed out of 
one window and back in through mine as clearly as if Ham 
Knapp were sitting in the seat next to me. 

I rested my head against the window post and began to 
listen intently. The woof of wind produced by cars ap- 
proaching in the opposite direction caused some blanks in 
the conversation, but I heard enough. 

 ... tranquilizer and laxative ... 

How did you ... 

 ... sent biscuits ... doggie treats ... for the star dog. 

 ... laxative and tranquilizers and those four little legs will buckle, 
and those little bowels won't hold ... There followed someiaugh- 
ter and some mumbling. 

Nadia had told The Souls about Ginger's bad reaction to 
tranquilizers during her trip to Florida last August. She 
could very well have told this to everyone including 
Froelich. Froelich could have told Knapp, or Knapp could 
have heard it himself, for Nadia enjoyed talking about 
Ginger. 

Tranquilizers and laxatives ... Pass out like a mop. Instant coma. 

What's the point ? She'll pass out backstage. 

 ... point is that star dog Ginger is out and buddy dog Arnold is in. 

It was clear Ham meant harm to Ginger. 

No problem ... Mother keeps a supply ... 

Why would his mother keep a supply of animal tran- 
quilizers at home? 

 ... easy ... gave them to Nadia ... gift from my mother ... 

Of course! Knapp's mother was a veterinarian, the owner 
and operator of Vet in a Van. On several occasions I had 


108 


seen the van bring Ham to school. The van was painted 
with the Vet in a Van logo and beneath it was written: Pat 
Knapp, DVM. I had assumed that Dr. Pat Knapp was a man 
and that his mother had borrowed the car. It had not oc- 
curred to me that his mother was the vet in the van. 

It took nb great leap of intelligence to realize that 
Hamilton Knapp had laced Ginger's dog treats with tran- 
quilizers and laxatives so that she would do one, possibly 
two, embarrassing things on stage. He gave Nadia the 
drugged treats and told her that they were a gift from Dr. 
Knapp, who was Ginger's veterinarian. I could easily picture 
Hamilton Knapp telling Nadia that Dr. Knapp wanted 
Ginger to have these special treats for her performance. 
Nadia was so crazy about Ginger that she would believe 
that anyone who met her wanted to give her gifts. 

As soon as the bus stopped, I made my way forward and 
slipped a Year-of-the- Souls penny into Noah's hand. In the 
crush at the bus door, I had time to whisper, "Backstage 
emergency. Cover for me." For reasons we had not spoken 
of, yet each of us understood, none of us was ready to reveal 
our association. I watched Noah make his way toward Ethan 
and pass a Sou! penny to him. He had understood. I knew 
he would. 

Just inside the auditorium, Noah bent down to tie his 
shoe, and Ethan tripped over him. They caused enough 
confusion for me to slip back outside and run around toward 
the back of the building and enter the auditorium through 
the stage door. 

I was backstage. 

I stayed in the shadow of the wings for a minute until I 
could get my bearings. The cast was jabbering, tugging at 


109 



their clothes, too excited about themselves to pay attention 
to anyone else. 

The first time Ginger appears onstage, she is running in 
front of the dog catcher. She is supposed to be a stray, and 
her fur must look matted and dirty. Nadia accomplished this 
by wetting portions of Gingers fur and tamping them down. 
From the audience, the wet spots look dark and dirty. For 
Ginger's second appearance, she wears a rope leash, and for 
her final appearance, a scene in which Ginger and Annie 
have taken up residence at the mansion of the wealthy 
Daddy Warbucks, Ginger- as -Sandy appears clean and 
brushed and wears a rhinestone collar and red ribbon 
around her neck. Between acts Nadia has time to dry 
Gingers fur and brush her until her coat glistens. 

Backstage between the wings stood the prop table 
where Nadia kept the big red bow and rhinestone collar, the 
hair dryer, the rope, and the treats that Stage -Annie uses to 
entice Ginger. I saw the table and worked my way invisibly 
through the backstage crowd, a technique I had learned 
from Gopal when I helped him with his act on board the 
cruise ship. 

The treats were already laid out on the props table. I saw 
the rope. I also saw a fancy collar, but it was wider than 
Ginger's, and the red bow was different. I examined the 
treats. They, too, were different. They were shaped like 
strips of bacon. Ginger's usual treats were shaped like small 
bones. I was sure that these were drugged. I edged my way 
over to the table to pick up the dog biscuits and throw them 
away. 1 would destroy these treats, and then, if time and op- 
portunity allowed, I would find Nadias supply and substi- 
tute good ones for the drugged ones. 


If time and opportunity did not allow, then Ginger 
would have to go into her act without a bribe. I would count 
on Gingers genius. 

Before I had a chance to scoop up the bacon-shaped 
treats from the table, I saw Froelich and Arnold coming out 
of the boys' dressing room. Arnold was wet down and not 
wearing his collar or dog tags. Mrs. Reynolds was waiting 
outside the boys' dressing room. She smiled and said some- 
thing to Froelich and then called, "Places, everyone." 

As the backstage crowd started breaking up, I saw 
Nadia. She was holding Ginger's leash and carrying the 
shopping bag where she kept her props. Ginger was still 
wearing her regular collar and dog tags. 

Had something already happened to Ginger? 

It was only minutes to curtain. I changed directions and 
slipped back into the shadow of the wings. I waited until 
Nadia came within a few feet of where I stood. I came for- 
ward, slipped a Year-of-the-Souls penny into her hand, and 
immediately returned to the shadows. Nadia gave no indi- 
cation that she had the penny, but she was at my side in less 
than a minute. 

"Is Ginger all right?" I asked. 

"She is fine," she said, shortening her leash and laying the 
shopping bag down on the floor. She reached down to pet 
Ginger. "Ginger is having a day off. It was Mrs. Reynolds's 
idea. Mike Froelich has been so good about coming to re- 
hearsals, and Arnold has become so well trained that Mrs. 
Reynolds decided to let him play Sandy at this performance." 

"Oh," I said, "when did you find out?" 

"Just this morning. Do not worry. Arnold is only a sub- 
stitute. Ginger will appear at all of the evening performances." 


110 


111 



"So the treats on the props table are Arnold's, not 
Ginger's?" 

"In a manner of speaking. Our vet sent them over for 
Ginger, but since Arnold is performing today, I gave him 
some. We both use the same vet." 

The treats awaiting Arnold were drugged. Neither 
Michael nor Nadia knew it. And Hamilton Knapp did not 
know that Arnold, not Ginger, was about to consume them. 

I could save Arnold from the poisoned treats, let him go 
on, and let Knapp think that his dirty trick had worked. 
One for the price of two. Or I could let Arnold eat the 
drugged treats, embarrass Froelich, and let Ginger go on. 
Two for the price of one. 

There they were, waiting on the prop table. There they 
were, waiting for my decision. 

"Why are you here, Julian?" Nadia asked. 

'To wish you 'Break a leg,"' I said. '"Break a leg' is what 
you say to theater people instead of good luck." 

"And what do you say to theater dogs?" she asked. 

"You double it. You say, 'Break two legs.'" 

Nadia laughed. "Really?" she asked. 

"Really," I replied. 

Nadia laid her shopping bag down at my feet and 
tugged at Ginger's leash. "Come along, Ginger," she said, 
"let us go wish some people to break some legs." 

I watched them walk away. 

I made my decision. 

I waited in the dark of the wing until the orchestra was 
well into playing the overture, for then I knew that the 
house lights would be lowered, and I could make my way to 


my seat unnoticed. Noah and Ethan had propped their jack- 
ets and backpacks on an aisle seat so that the shadow cast in 
the darkened auditorium could easily be mistaken for a per- 
son. I slipped into the seat, nodded to both Noah and 
Ethan, and waited for Sandy's first appearance on stage. 

The first time Sandy appeared, running across the stage 
being chased by the dog catcher, the audience broke into 
spontaneous applause. They were already in love. The sec- 
ond time, the policeman asked, "Is that your dog, little girl?" 
and Sandy walked across the stage and sat at Stage -Annie's 
feet, and once again the audience broke into applause. This 
time, however, when the applause was about to die down, 
Knapp and Lord exchanged a triumphant look and began 
barking, "Arfl Arfl Arfl" and clapping in rhythm. Soon all 
the other kids picked up on that, and the play could not 
continue. 

Senior monitors started fanning down the aisles to lo- 
cate the source of the trouble, but before the monitor was 
even with their row, Knapp's hands were folded in his lap,- 
his lips, sealed. 

When the play was finished and after all the players had 
taken a bow, Amold-as-Sandy walked in front of all the ac- 
tors and sat down, center stage. The red bow had slipped 
from the back of his neck to the side. He sat downstage, 
center, for only a second before glancing over his shoulder, 
getting up, and walking a few steps upstage to line up with 
the other players. Stage -Annie and Daddy Warbucks took a 
step to the right and to the left respectively to make room 
for him. Arnold looked out over the audience, sitting in a 
circle of light, and the audience went wild. 



They stood, began clapping in rhythm to their chant, 
SAN-dy, SAN-dy, SAN-dy. Knapp and Lord picked up the 
beat and started an undertone of ArfiArfiArf!, and soon the 
audience became a two-part chorus with half the auditorium 
chanting SAN-dy, and the other half responding with ARF, 
ARF in a manner more suited to an athletic contest than mu- 
sical theater. The curtain was dropped, the house lights 
came on, and the chanting softened, faded, and died. Knapp 
and Lord exchanged a satisfied look. 

Mrs. Reynolds walked onstage and stood in front of the 
curtain. She held a microphone in her hand and hissed into 
it, "Sit-t-t-t down!" 

THUMP-THUMP-THUMP-THUMP-THUMP-MP- 
MP-MP— the sound of hundreds of bottoms hitting hun- 
dreds of seats followed. 

Mrs. Reynolds waited until an embarrassed silence fell 
over the auditorium. "Part of the theater experience is learn- 
ing to be a good audience. You have not been a good audi- 
ence. You have been a very bad one. 1 am sorry that you 
have not learned at home how to act in public. I am 
ashamed for you because I know you are not ashamed for 
yourselves. I would like you to leave. Now. You can start 
correcting your behavior by leaving this auditorium in a 
quiet and orderly fashion.'' 

Suddenly senior monitors appeared at the end of cvciy 
third row, and we quietly and slowly made our way toward 
the exit. The auditorium was almost empty by the time we 
reached the exit. Mrs. Olinski was sitting in her chair be- 
tween the doors. She called my name. "Julian. Julian Singh," 
she called, "I would like to see you a minute." 

Had she seen me slip backstage? Or did she think that I 
started that ruckus in the auditorium? My school days are 


over, I thought. 1 will be expelled, I thought. How will I 
break the news to Papa? 

Mrs. Olinski said, "1 understand you have guests at 
Sillington House."' 

"Yes, ma'am, we do. Mr. and Mrs. Diamondstein were 
due to arrive from Florida this afternoon." 

"Mrs. Diamondstein is an old friend of mine. She asked 
me to stop by and meet her new husband. How would you 
like to ride home with me?" she asked. 

I was so relieved that I could not speak. I answered by 
nodding my head like one of those nodding animals that 
Americans put on the rear ledge of their automobiles. 

Ethan, who was just behind fne, said, "May I come, too? 
Mrs. Diamondstein is my grandma Draper." 

"Yes, so she is. 1 had almost forgotten. Of course, you 
may come." 

"Let me go backstage and get Nadia," Ethan suggested. 
"Mr. Diamondstein is her grandfather." 

Mrs. Olinski laughed. "It seems all of our sixth grade is 
one happy family. Go ahead," she said. "Go backstage and 
tell Nadia to meet us at my van." 

A voice that was midway out the door called, "Can I 
come, too?" 

"You, Noah? What reason do you have?" Mrs. Olinski 
asked. 

"Me?" Noah asked. 'You want to know what reason I 
have for coming along?" 

Mrs. Olinski smiled patiently. 

"Well, Mrs. Olinski, my reason is the best of all. Fact: I 
was best man at their wedding." 

Mrs. Olinski laughed. "Were you really?" 

"Yes, I was. I'll tell you about it. I'll spare no detail." 



Mrs. Olinski laughed. "Then, by all means, Noah, you 
must come along." 

Noah grinned. "I have always wanted to ride in a handi- 
capped van. All my life, I have wanted to see how a dis- 
abled person like yourself applies the brakes and steps on 
the gas." 

Mrs. Olinski said, "I don't exactly step on the gas." 

'There you go!" Noah said. "This is precisely what I 
would like to see. I would precisely like to see exactly how 
you apply the gas." 

Mrs. Olinski said, "That is either the most honest or the 
most dishonest answer I have ever heard. I must notify the 
bus driver that I'll be driving you four souls home." 

Why did she say that? She was smiling. Did she know 
that we were The Souls? Did she know? Noah caught my 
eye and quickly changed the subject. "You'll have to take 
Ginger home, too, Mrs. Olinski. If you don't mind, of 
course. You don't have to have any special fittings in the van 
to transport animals. It's a good thing, too. Now, if Ginger 
were a seeing-eye dog ..." 

Mrs. Olinski interrupted. "Noah," she said, "run down to 
the bus and tell Mrs. Korshak that I will be along in a 
minute. I have a message for her." 

"I'd be happy to give her that message, Mrs. Olinski." 

"I'm sure you would, but the message involves permis- 
sions that I, not you, have the authority to give." Noah 
started down the row of yellow buses, and Mrs. Olinski 
followed. 

There had been a moment backstage when I had been 
tempted to allow Arnold to eat the drugged treats. That had 


been the same moment that I thought it would be satisfying 
to get even with Froelich and Knapp. But then I was able 
mentally to separate Froelich from Knapp and Arnold from 
both of them, so I slipped over to the props table, scooped 
up all the poisoned treats, and put them in my right pocket. 
At the same time I substituted Ginger's wholesome treats— 
treats I had taken from Nadia's shopping bag— from my left 
pocket. 

The drugged treats were still in my pocket. 

Ethan, Nadia, and Ginger had not yet come out of the 
auditorium. Noah and Mrs. Olinski had gone to speak to 
Mrs. Korshak. I stood alone. There was something I wanted 
to do. When Knapp had started that ruckus, I had momen- 
tarily regretted my decision to save Arnold. I was still so 
angry that I was about to violate one of the cardinal rules 
that Gopal had taught me. 

I walked out onto the street so that no one on the side- 
walk would notice as I made my way down the line of buses 
waiting— headlight to taillight— by the curb. Beyond them 
was the line of cars waiting for pickups. Traffic could go 
only one way, and no one was allowed to make a U-turn, so 
even those cars that had already picked up their riders were 
stuck, waiting for the buses to load. 

Gopal had taught me that magicians never reveal the se- 
crets of their trade to laymen. Gopal always said that magi- 
cians who were interested in letting people know how 
clever they were were not really magicians. "Don't ever de- 
stroy the wonder," Gopal had said. "Let your magic show 
you off, not you show off your magic." 

I knew that Hamilton Knapp would find out soon 
enough that Arnold, not Ginger, had been chosen for the 



afternoon's performance. He would find out soon enough 
that his trick had not worked. I knew that I should never re- 
veal to Hamilton Knapp that I had saved Arnold from the 
fate he had meant for Ginger. I knew all of that. Yet I moved 
toward the Vet in a Van. Dr. Knapp was behind the wheel, 
waiting for her turn to pull out. I walked around the back of 
the van onto the sidewalk on the passenger's side. I tapped 
on the window and motioned for Ham to roll it down. I 
reached into the open window. He pulled away from me but 
said nothing. 

"What's the matter?" his mother asked. 

"Your son has something growing out of his head," I said 
as 1 pulled two bacon-shaped doggie treats from his ears. "I 
think these belong to you," I said as one by one I dropped 
the rest of the drugged biscuits on his lap. I turned and 
walked away. 

I was glad that I had chops. Gopal would forgive me. 


S 

T he deadline for choosing an academic team was the 
Tuesday following the winter holiday. The other 
homeroom teachers were ready by Thanksgiving. 
They had held mini contests in their classrooms and had se- 
lected the winners of those. They had ready answers for 
anyone who asked how they had chosen their teams. In the 
teachers' lounge, Mrs. Sharkey, who taught sixth grade 
math, accused Mrs. Olinski of being dictatorial, and Ms. 
Masolino, who taught music and who did not have a home- 
room at all, hinted that she was lazy. Mrs. Olinski did not 
take kindly to these remarks. Her voice quavering, she an- 
swered her critics. "I have my reasons," she said, even 
though she knew she didn't. Something stronger than rea- 
son was having its way with her, and she didn't know what 
that was either. 

Mrs. Laurencin, Epiphany Middle School principal, 
called Mrs. Olinski into the office one afternoon and quietly 
warned her that she better have a good answer for the par- 
ents of any high honor roll student who didn't make her 
team. Mrs. Olinski said, "By the time they get to sixth grade, 
honor roll students won't risk making a mistake, and some- 



times to be successful, you have to risk making mistakes." 
Mrs. Laurencin agreed with her but warned her that that 
would not be a very popular reason. "Furthermore," Mrs. 
Olinski added, "sometimes we even have to risk making 
fools of ourselves." Mrs. Laurencin never approved of that 
answer either. 

Even though Mrs. Olinski could not tell why, she could 
tell when she decided not to hold try-outs. It was on a 
Saturday in late October, some time after four o'clock. She 
had been correcting social studies papers and had just fin- 
ished reading Noah Gershom's essay on the First 
Amendment when the thought flew into her head. She 
would appoint her team, the way the president appointed 
his cabinet. She made her decision. Just. Like. That. 

She chose Noah right away, and almost immediately 
after, she thought of Nadia and Ethan. They looked like 
strong candidates. She would watch them and see. 

In the weeks that followed, she became more convinced 
of their being right for the job. She had not yet officially 
notified any of them because she wanted to make all four 
appointments at the same time, and the fourth was causing 
problems. 

She had been considering asking Hamilton Knapp— 
yes, that Hamilton Knapp. Although he was naughty, he was 
also smart, and bad boys had always held a certain charm 
for her. But each time something told her he was the right 
choice, something else told her he was wrong. So she held 
back. 

While she waffled between asking Ham and not asking 
him, she never gave a thought to asking Julian Singh. He 
was smart (or else his English accent made him seem so). 


And he was sophisticated (or else his English accent made 
him seem so). But Julian Singh was too far off the mainland. 
He was an island unto himself, definitely not a team player. 
Ham Knapp was a leader. Ham Knapp had friends. But 
Julian stood alone. Just as he had stood alone the first day of 
school at the blackboard in front of the word CRIPPLE. 

On the day that Epiphany Middle School was invited to 
attend Annie, Mrs. Olinski had driven her van to the high 
school and had arrived ahead of the school bus. She waited 
at the foot of the steps as the kids filed out. She saw Julian 
Singh push his way forward and then scurry down the steps 
and out of sight. He had disappeared into thin air. She 
didn't want to call into thin air and look to all the world 
(and all the other teachers) as if she had no control of her 
class. Mrs. Olinski was annoyed with Julian Singh. Once in- 
side the auditorium, she had looked for him again but had 
been unable to spot him before the house lights dimmed, 
and the show got under way. 

Then Sandy appeared on stage, and the clapping and 
the chanting Atfi Arfi Arf> had started in the section of the 
auditorium where her class was seated. From where she had 
been sitting, in a handicapped space by the exit, she could 
not see who had started it, but she knew one of her students 
was responsible. She knew it, and she was angry. Mrs. 
Olinski had a great tolerance for mischief, but she had no 
patience for malice. This was not mischief. There is a play- 
ful quality to mischief. This was malice. There is a mean 
quality to malice. Someone in her class was terribly mean. 

When the lights went on, and Mrs. Reynolds stormed 
on stage to scold the audience, Mrs. Olinski was able to 
wheel herself around to examine her students. With a sick 



feeling in her stomach, she scanned them one at a time. Like 
the cursor on a computer screen her eyes moved from the 
first row to the second, then stopped. Her pulse quickened. 
She knew. She had no proof, never would have proof. But 
she knew. She knew who had started the ruckus. 

And she knew then that she would not, could not, ask 
Hamilton Knapp to be the fourth member of the team. 

And that is when she went to tea at Sillington House. 

Margaret Draper Diamondstein must have been waiting 
at the window. No sooner had Mrs. Olinski stopped her van 
than her old friend came rushing out the door. She was 
wearing a jogging suit but no coat. The wind was whipping 
off the lake, and she hugged her upper arms and stamped 
her feet as she waited for the door to open. Margy 
Diamondstein reached up into the van, and Eva Marie 
Olinski reached down out of it, and they hugged. 

Then a voice said, "Hi, Grandma." 

It was Ethan. 

Margaret asked, "Ethan? Is that you?" 

"Yeah. Me. Ethan." 

"Come on down out of that van and let me see you," she 
said. Ethan stood in front of her, looking enchantingly awk- 
ward until Margaret pulled him to her. Eva Marie Olinski 
saw his arms hanging limply at his side, his wrists hanging 
below his cuffs like meter sticks showing how much he had 
grown since the jacket was new. Ethan slowly lifted his arms 
and fit them around his grandmother's waist as she rested 
her chin on the top of his head. She closed her eyes and ab- 
sorbed the blond waxy smell of his hair before she stood 
him at arm's length. "You've grown since summer," she said. 


"I have. I know," he answered, and shot his arms out of 
his sleeves showing several inches bare above the wrist 
bones. "Would you believe, only a month ago, these cov- 
ered my fingertips?" 

Margaret laughed and said, "No, Ethan, I would not be- 
lieve." 

"Just testing." 

Nadia waited until they had backed away from each 
other before saying, "Hello, Margaret." 

"Nadial" Margaret said. "What a surprise. Is Eva Marie— 
Mrs. Olinski— your teacher, too?" 

Nadia replied, "Yes, Margaret. Yes, she is." 

At that moment a slender man with heavy gray eye- 
brows came out of Sillington House, holding his knuckles 
to his hips as he looked over the scene. He saw Nadia and 
sprinted over, calling, "Nadia! Nadia!" He hugged her close 
and then kissed the top of her head several times until 
Ginger wedged her way between them. "1 had no idea I'd see 
you this afternoon." 

Nadia said, "Ginger is a star, Grandpa. She is excellent." 

Her grandfather replied, "I have no doubt about that. 
After all, Ginger is a genius. And we're going to see her to- 
morrow night. We're all going. We're going with your 
mother." 

"I know," Nadia said, looking very pleased. "I know." 

Eva Marie Olinski watched Margaret Draper Diamond- 
stein hug her grandson. The new Mrs. Diamondstein was 
dressed in a jogging suit. A turquoise jogging suit. Turquoise! 
She had always regarded the color turquoise, like shocking 
pink and chartreuse, as the color equivalent of the word 
ain't-, quaint when seldom used but vulgar in great doses. As 



she watched Margaret hug her grandchild and Izzy hug his, 
her mental censors and her customary good manners started 
shutting down. She could not stand it another minute. She 
was on the verge of screaming with pain and rage when she 
felt her wheelchair begin to move. She felt herself being 
pushed toward the front porch of Sillington House. 

Eva Marie Olinski was so blinded by jealousy that she 
had not noticed Mr. Singh come out. From behind her chair 
his voice floated down upon her in soft waves. "I have pre- 
pared a tea," he said. 

A tea ? she thought. Yes, a tea. It was that time of day. It 
was four o'clock. 

'The others will join us shortly." Eva Marie Olinski 
turned around and at eye level saw a long blue apron. Her 
eyes traveled upward and saw a black beard, a broad white 
smile, a pair of amber eyes, a white turban. Saved by a 
genie, she thought. 

Mr. Singh maneuvered her wheelchair to a table in the 
back of the dining room. Without asking, he ceremoniously 
poured tea into a delicate china cup. Cream ? No. Sugar? No. 
Yes, it is best to drink tea without. And she did. She drank unhur- 
riedly. Before her cup was empty, she felt something lift 
from her shoulders. Was it jealousy or injury? Was it anger? 
Was it all of the above? She replaced her emptied cup in its 
saucer. She waited. She was calm. 

Margy and Izzy joined her at the table, and she drank 
another cup of tea and ate a cucumber sandwich, taking four 
bites out of a patch of bread so trim she could have swal- 
lowed it whole. She hardly heard what Margaret and Izzy 
were saying. She did not interrupt, and soon she was listen- 
ing, first out of politeness— for courtesy was the first of her 


civilized senses to return— and then out of interest, genuine 
interest. 

She looked around the room and saw the four children, 
Ethan, Noah, Nadia, and Julian sitting at a table on the far 
side of the room. They were talking among themselves and 
drinking tea. They did not interrupt one another, Mrs. 
Olinski thought, how unusual. There were nods and smiles 
and obvious pleasure in one another's company. Mrs. 
Olinski thought, how unusual to find four sixth graders who 
listen to one another sympathetically, unselfishly. How cu- 
rious. How courteous. Mrs. Olinski thought, when people 
come to tea, they are courteous. She thought, I believe in 
courtesy. It is the way we avoid hurting people's feelings. 
She thought that maybe— just maybe— Western 
Civilization was in a decline because people did not take 
time to take tea at four o'clock. 

The Souls continued their animated conversation, when 
suddenly, as if on signal, the four of them looked back at 
Mrs. Olinski. 

And that is when she knew. 

That is the exact moment she knew that Julian Singh 
would be the fourth member of her team and that she would 
always give good answers when asked why she had chosen 
them. And then and there, she also knew that someday she 
would drink another cup of slow tea at Sillington House. 


124 


125 



Julian said, "With all due respect, sir, I think you 
ought to check another source." 


6 

 

he commissioner looked over his list of possi- 
ble answers. "Posh and tip?" he asked. 

Julian quickly answered, "Posh means fashion- 
able and is the acronym for Port Out, Starboard 
Home, referring to the time when India belonged to 
Britain, and the people traveling there wanted the 
shady side of the ship both going and coming. And 
tip, meaning the small sum of money given for ser- 
vices rendered, is the acronym for To Insure 
Promptness." 

The commissioner laughed. 'You may be a little 
ahead of us on that one, Epiphany. I don't have either 
of those acronyms on my list. We'll have to check with 
our advisory panel." He nodded to the three people 
sitting at a table on the far side of the room. One 
rapidly punched keys on a computer as the other two 
consulted large books. The three of them conferred 
briefly and passed a note to the commissioner. 

"We can allow posh, but we do not find a reference 
for tip." 


Their path to the state finals started with the sixth-grade 
championship. Mrs. Olinski had expected victory, for her 
team was quick and informed and worked together per- 
fectly. No one had expected them to trounce the other two 
sixth grades, but they did. Their victory was so profound 
that the sixth-grade math teacher, Mrs. Sharkey, confided to 
the music teacher, Ms. Masolino, that for the first time in 
the history of Epiphany Middle School there was a 
chance— just a possibility, mind you— that a sixth-grade 
team might beat the seventh grade. Mrs. Sharkey said that, 
after all, she knew the current seventh grade, for she had 
taught them just last year, and in her opinion, when they 
were very, very good, they were mediocre. 

The Souls practiced during activities hour— that portion 
of time between eleven-thirty and one o'clock that was not 
devoted to eating lunch. Mrs. Olinski read questions from 
note cards: one card; one question. She used three sets of 
questions. 

The first was a series of questions required of everyone 
in a particular grade. Knowing that they would be compet- 
ing with grade seven, she added their questions to her sixth 
grade set. The second set had been culled from previous 
contests. Some required only speed: How many quarters in 
twenty dollars? Some required cleverness: If one man could 
paint an eight foot by twelve foot wall in a half hour, how 
long would it take three men to paint a wall that was eight 
feet by twenty-four feet? The third set of questions were 



126 


127 



ones she had made up by weeding items from the news and 
connecting them to geography or history or both: A mas- 
terpiece by the artist Rembrandt was recently stolen from a 
museum in his native country. What is that country? What 
is its capital? Mrs. Olinski required that they find the coun- 
try on a map, and then would ask them to name two other 
famous artists. Their countries? Their capital cities? 

They beat grade seven, almost doubled their score. Fact: 
No sixth grade team had ever defeated a seventh grade 
team. They were scheduled to go up against grade eight. 
Further fact: No sixth grade had ever competed against the 
eighth because no sixth grade had ever gotten that far. 

When word got out that Mrs. Olinski's homeroom had 
a chance of beating the eighth grade, kids from the other 
two sixth grades started signaling a thumbs-up sign when 
passing a team member in the hall. They raised their arms 
high overhead and lifted their thumbs like a forest of small 
apostrophes at the ends of their closed fists. 

Excitement grew throughout the week. Mrs. Olinski's 
sixth graders were David versus the eighth grade Goliath, 
and the kids with the slingshots knew how to use them. 
Soon the vanquished seventh grade chose sides,- they would 
cheer for grade six. On Thursday, the day before the show- 
down, kids from grades six and seven lined the halls be- 
tween the cafeteria and Mrs. Olinski's room and gave her 
and The Souls a round of applause as they returned from 
lunch to practice. Mrs. Olinski smiled and said thank you, 
thank you as she wheeled herself between the flanks of 
honor guards. 

Traces of her smile remained as the rest of the class filed. 


in for social studies. She sat at her desk and sorted out the 
papers that were due to be returned. 

The room was quiet until a student in the back of the 
room let out an enormous belch and said, not too sincerely, 
"Sorry." 

Mrs. Olinski continued sorting papers before looking 
up. "Hamilton Knapp?" 

"Yes, ma'am," he answered. 

"Would you please come to the front?" 

He walked slowly, watching her, a half smile on his face. 
She let him take his time. Before he reached the front of the 
classroom, someone launched another belch. Its sound 
rocketed forward, and the laughter that followed traveled 
the same trajectory. Mrs. Olinski waited until Ham reached 
the front of the room before asking, "Jared Lord, would you 
please join Mr. Knapp?" 

Jared also took his time, and Mrs. Olinski did not rush 
him either. As he ambled down his row toward the front of 
the room, smiling faces lifted and tilted toward him like the 
broad front faces of sunflowers as they follow the sun across 
heaven. Mrs. Olinski allowed that, too. 

"Now, Mr. Knapp and Mr. Lord," she said, "I would like 
the two of you to teach the entire class how to belch on 
command. Please describe the process for all of us." She 
picked up a piece of chalk from the ledge. "Which one of 
you wants to take notes on the instructions we are about to 
receive?" Neither volunteered, so she thrust the chalk into 
Knapp's hand. "I think you enjoy writing on the blackboard, 
Mr. Knapp," she said. Ham took the chalk. The class regis- 
tered its approval with body language that was the equiva- 
lent of silent applause. 


128 


129 



The class waited. "I'll help you with the spelling," Mrs. 
Olinski said. 

Ham began to clown around, rolling his eyes and say- 
ing, "Well, first you ..." 

The rest of the kids tightened their stomachs, opened 
their mouths, and tried to figure out how to explain a belch. 
Jared stood at the blackboard— empty-handed, awkward, 
uncomfortable— and he too, tried to figure it out. Knapp 
made another attempt. "Well, first you ..." Then another 
long, awkward, uncomfortable wait. "Well, first you ..." 

Mrs. Olinski allowed them to stand there until three 
minutes seemed like thirty. Then she sent them back to 
their seats. "Since you cannot describe what you have done, 
1 would call belching loudly to interrupt our class an un- 
speakable act. Unspeakable. And because you cannot explain 
how to do it, I would say that you cannot teach either." She 
paused, locked eyes first with Knapp and then with Lord be- 
fore adding, "But I can. If 1 choose to, I can explain how to 
belch on command, and I could teach you. If 1 so choose." 
She looked at Knapp and Lord again, her nostrils flared 
slightly, then slowly turned her head to the class and added, 
"But I don't. 

'The front of this classroom is privileged territory. 
There are only two reasons for you to be here. One, you are 
teaching something to the rest of the class or, two, you have 
been invited. From now on, the only tricks that I am willing 
to put up with are those that you can first explain and then 
teach." 

She looked at Jared Lord and asked, "Do you under- 
stand, Mr. Lord?" Jared attempted a grin. His attempt failed, 
and he nodded yes. "Then let us have no more interruptions 
with unspeakable acts. No barking Arfi either. Do you un- 


derstand me, Mr. Knapp?" Ham nodded yes. "Mr. Lord?" 
Jared said, "Yes, ma'am." 

As he returned to his seat, no one smiled at Ham or even 
made eye contact with him. 

Suddenly Nadia Diamondstein thrust her left leg 
straight out into the aisle. Noah Gershom, who was three 
seats in back of her, stuck out his right leg. Ethan Potter saw 
and raised his right arm in the air. As if on cue, Julian Singh 
raised his left fist. For a moment above and below eye level, 
all four limbs stuck out, and then, just as quickly, all four dis- 
appeared. It was quite a balancing act. 

Mrs. Laurencin called a school assembly for the contest 
against the eighth grade. The principal herself asked the 
questions. If a team missed its question, the other team had an 
opportunity to answer. To break a tie, the last team to answer 
correctly had to correctly answer one additional question. 

This was the question that the eighth grade could not 
answer and Noah could: Name all the parts of the human 
eye in the order that light reaches them. 

This was the four-part question that they answered to 
win: Name the famous fathers of: Queen Elizabeth I of 
England. Esau and Jacob. Alexander the Great. Our country. 

Mrs. Laurencin was impressed. The sixth grade was 
jubilant. Ms. Masolino said she knew it all along, and Mrs. 
Sharkey said they gave new meaning to the term "bottoms 

n 

up. 

The Souls were now the school's team. The next step 
was the contest against Knightsbridge for the district 
championship. 


130 


131 



“I'll allow posh but not tip." 

"With all due respect, sir, you are wrong." 

At that point, the commissioner could have dis- 
qualified the entire Epiphany team— and maybe 
would have— except that he was rendered speechless. 

 


7 


A ny other team on spaceship Earth would 
have worried about Julian's defying an official 
of the sovereign state of New York. But not 
The Souls. They would let him risk whatever he 
wanted. 

The commissioner was— to put it politely— 
annoyed. He looked at his seating chart. "Mr. Singh?” 
he asked. "Are you Julian Singh?" 

"Yes, sir, I am." 

"Well, Mr. Singh, we all agreed to stand by the rul- 
ing of the panel of experts." 

'The panel's information is not complete, sir." 

"Mr. Singh, we must stand by the ruling of the 
panel." 

"Sir,” Julian said, "long ago in England, pub owners 
used to place a box on the bar. They put a sign on the 
box that said To Insure Promptness, capitalizing each 
of the three words. People dropped coins ..." 


To prepare for the contest with Knightsbridge, Mrs. 
Olinski continued to drill her team during activities hour. 
The week of the Knightsbridge contest, the five of them 
brown-bagged their lunches so that they could practice 
through lunch. Mrs. Olinski's packets of note cards grew. 
She drew questions at random from each of the three sets. 
The Souls had become so familiar with some of them that 
she had to ask only, "What did Martin Luther ..." before 
four hands shot up in the air and four voices would shout 
out, "The Ninety-five Theses.” 

That would not do. Answering before a question was 
completed or having several kids answer at once were vio- 
lations of the rules that would cost points. Mrs. Olinski re- 
minded them that if they continued to do that, the penalties 
could easily add up to a loss. Her team seemed to commu- 
nicate with a secret stealth language that slipped beneath 
thought. It took only one warning, and they stopped. Just. 
Like. That. 

With the success of her team, Mrs. Olinski was asked 
more and more often how she had chosen them, and she 
continued to give several good answers, varying them as the 
need arose. They worked well together. They were willing 



to take time to drill. They understood the rules. They were 
quick. AH of these answers were true, but not the whole 
truth. The whole truth was that Mrs. Olinski did not yet 
know the whole truth. 

Then the day before the contest for the district champi- 
onship Mr. Connor LeDue, the principal of Knightsbridge 
Middle School, found some pretext to visit Mrs. Olinski. 
He stood to one side of her wheelchair, leaned over, smiled, 
and said, "I heard a rumor that your team is expecting to 
blow mine out of the water." His smile was as genuine as a 
Xeroxed signature. 

In order to make eye contact with someone standing 
where Mr. LeDue stood, Mrs. Olinski had to stretch her 
neck in two directions— up and to the side— and open her 
eyes wide. This made her look worshipful. She wasn't. 

Mr. LeDue applied his smile again and said, "I told our 
coach that she could expect to be hung if she lets your sixth 
grade grunges beat us out.” 

"Well then," Mrs. Olinski replied, "much as I respect 
your coach, I recommend that you start buying rope." She 
shifted her head slightly and added, "By the way, Mr. 
LeDue, in our grunge neighborhood, we say hanged, not 
hung. Check it out.” 

Dr. Roy Clayton Rohmer, the district superintendent, 
was a worried man. Item one: He worried about his contract 
that was up for renewal. Item two: He worried about the 
district playoffs. Item three: He worried about Mr. Homer 
Fairbain, his deputy superintendent in charge of instruction. 
He worried because item three could affect item two, which 
could affect item one. 

The previous year when Mr. Homer Fairbain had been 


master of ceremonies for the district playoffs, the contest 
had been broadcast on educational TV. When he was to ask 
the question, What is the native country oj Pope John Paul II? Mr. 
Fairbain asked, "What is the native country of Pope John 
Paul Eye Eye?” The day after the broadcast, there were five 
letters to the editor in the paper about Mr. Fairbain, none fa- 
vorable. 

Dr. Rohmer knew that this year's broadcast would have 
a larger than usual audience, partly because people were cu- 
rious about having a sixth grade team be a contender for the 
district middle school championship but mostly because 
everyone would be waiting for Homer Fairbain to goof. Dr. 
Rohmer had to let Mr. Fairbain be master of ceremonies 
again. It would be his one chance to show the community 
that he had learned a thing or II. 

Dr. Rohmer knew that if the names of any of the former 
Soviet Socialist Republics— Uzbekistan or Azerbaijan or, 
Heaven forbid! Kyrgyzstan— appeared in any of the ques- 
tions, Homer would embarrass himself. If he had to read the 
names of the ministers of Japan or Zaire, or any name con- 
taining more consonants than vowels, or more vowels than 
consonants, he would embarrass himself. He would also em- 
barrass Dr. Rohmer and make him worry a lot. 

Mr. Fairbain, who was a humble man, saw no problem 
with requesting help from one of the reading teachers until 
Dr. Rohmer pointed out that the entire staff of remedial 
reading teachers came from the very department he was in 
charge of. 

Dr. Rohmer, whose patience was as close to the end as 
his contract, arranged to give Mr. Fairbain the questions a 
week in advance, told him to practice reading them out 
loud, and strongly suggested that if he had any difficulty 


134 


135 



with them— anything at all— to see one of the school's 
speech therapists. (Therapists came from the department of 
student services, not curriculum.) 

The Souls stayed after school late the Thursday before 
the Knightsbridge contest. Mrs. Laurencin sent in Cokes 
and pizza for the team. On Friday afternoon, she came into 
Mrs. Olinski's room and told the team that after this prac- 
tice, she wanted everyone to go home and get a good nights 
sleep, and that win, lose, or draw, she couldn't be more 
proud of all of them tomorrow than she was at that moment. 

For all the reasons given— an unprecedented sixth grade 
championship team, the snobbishness and arrogance of the 
Knightsbridge team, as well as waiting for Mr. Fairbain to 
make a fool of himself— the Knightsbridge cafetorium was 
filled to capacity. Small kids were perched on tabletops be- 
cause there weren't enough chairs, and the Epiphany sixth 
graders stood like caryatids leaning against three of the four 
walls of the room. 

Mr. Fairbain did well and actually seemed to be enjoy- 
ing himself until syllabication did him in. The question was 
to name the tribe associated with each of the following 
Native American leaders and name a major accomplishment 
of one. The leaders' names were Sequoyah, Tecumseh, 
Osceola, and Geronimo. However, Gtrottimo was hyphen- 
ated at a line break, so Gero appeared on one line and 
itimo on the next, and unfortunately, Mr. Fairbain read it as 
Jair-oh-NEEM-oh. 

Dr. Rohmer hoped that no one would notice, and no 
one on the Knightsbridge team did. Fact: They could not 
answer the question. Then it was The Soul's turn to answer, 


and Julian corrected Mr. Fairbain. "With all due respect, sir, 
I believe one of the men of whom you speak is Geronimo, a 
member of the Apache tribe." 

Poor Mr. Fairbain. He looked down at the card, 
squinted, read it, and said, "Yes, indeed, you are right, young 
man. Good for you." He caught Dr. Rohmer's eye and knew 
he had done something wrong. He laughed nervously and 
said, "You look a bit like an Indian yourself." 

Julian smiled. "I am a hybrid. I am in part what is called 
East Indian." 

"Well, now, that is special," Mr. Fairbain said, smiling 
and looking out over the audience, and wanting to reinforce 
his compliment, asked, "What is your tribe?" 

Dr. Rohmer paled to the point of translucence, and the 
audience gasped. Everyone— even those who had not had 
diversity training at taxpayer expense— knew that even 
though it was correct to recognize a person's ethnicity, it 
was not correct to comment upon it in public. 

Mrs. Olinski thought Dr. Rohmer would have to be 
taken out on a stretcher. Mr. Fairbain noticed Dr. Rohmer's 
sudden anemia, and without knowing what he had done 
wrong, but knowing it was something, said, "That's all very 
interesting, young man, but I'm afraid we must move along. 
Can you answer the question or not?” 

"I can, sir," Julian replied. And he did. 

His answer put Epiphany ahead. 

They had to answer one more question: What is the ori- 
gin of the phrase, "to meet one's Waterloo" and what does it 
mean? 

There was a clear, bright gleam in Ethan's eye as he 
concluded his answer with, . . to meet one's Waterloo means to 



suffer a crushing defeat." Crushing applause followed a 
nanosecond of crushing silence. Everyone clapped. But not 
the sixth-grade sentinels who lined the walls. Instead, upon 
a signal from Michael Froelich, they took from their pock- 
ets a piece of rope, which they pinned on their shirts in the 
place where a medal would go. 

When The Souls came down off the stage, they stood 
four abreast behind Mrs. Olinski's wheelchair and pushed 
her toward the back of the room where the sixth graders 
converged and formed a phalanx that lifted her— wheel- 
chair and all— onto their shoulders and carried her out of 
the building and into the parking lot. 

Two of the boys stopped short of Mrs. Olinski's van. 
One was Michael Froelich. Fie hopped on top of the other 
fellow's shoulders and draped a noose over the antenna of 
Mrs. Olinski's van. 

Ethan said, "Look, Ma, no hands," and Noah said, "Look, 
Ma, no legs," and Nadia thought, "Sometimes people need 
a lift between switches," and Julian said nothing but rubbed 
the little ivory monkey in his pocket. 

Other victories followed, but none was sweeter. 


8 

fter defeating Knightsbridge, The Souls started 
drilling for the regionals. 

There were eight regions in the state. Each was named 
for a major body of water that touched the counties within 
its boundary. They were named for lakes, great and small,- for 
rivers, flowing south or east, and one was named for a sound, 
Long Island Sound. Epiphany was in the region called Finger 
Lakes. Finger Lakes had never won the state championship. 
The Hudson River region, which included Maxwell Middle 
School, had won three out of the past four years. 

The week before the regionals, Mrs. Olinski arranged 
with Mrs. Laurencin to have the school opened on Saturday 
afternoon so they could have an extra drill. Her team had al- 
ways been willing— even eager— to practice, so she was sur- 
prised and disappointed when they refused. 

Finally Noah spoke. "No disrespect intended, Mrs. 
Olinski, but we would prefer not to." 

No disrespect, but. But what? But they prefer not tol 
"What happens on Saturday that is more important than an 
extra practice session?" she asked. 

Noah answered, "We have tea. On Saturdays we all have 

, it 

tea. 



138 


139 



"You have tea?" she asked. 

"Yes," Noah said. "We have tea." 

"At Sillington House," Nadia added. 

"At four," Ethan added. 

Then Julian said, 'Tea is always at four, Mrs. Olinski." 

Mr. Singh's teas at Sillington House were becoming 
well known in the community, and Mrs. Olinski remem- 
bered her half promise to herself after the matinee of Annie. 
She would have another cup of slow tea, and the children 
had just extended a half invitation. Two halves make a 
whole, she thought. She would go to tea at Sillington House 
at four o'clock on Saturday afternoon. 

At precisely three forty- five Mrs. Olinski locked the 
door to her house, got in her van, and drove to Sillington 
House. She arrived at four and had hardly let herself down 
from her van when she saw the front door swing open and 
Mr. Singh come down the path to the curb. He insisted 
upon wheeling her up the ramp across the wide porch. He 
paused before they entered the front hall and said, "We are 
glad you have come, Mrs. Olinski." 

'Why?" she asked. 

"Because Sillington House is its own place, Mrs. Olinski. 
You will soon see." He wheeled her through the front hall 
and into the dining room where The Souls were standing 
behind a table in the back. 

There were two other tables where paying guests were 
already seated. They smiled and nodded at her in the ap- 
proving way people do when they see people in wheel- 
chairs. 

Mr. Singh wheeled her around to the side of the table 
opposite The Souls. They greeted her. Quietly. In unison. 


One word. They said, Welcome." A place had been set at 
the end on the side of the table away from the wall. 
Handicap parking, she thought. 

Julian said, "We have not yet poured your tea, Mrs. 
Olinski. We did not want it to get cold." 

Ethan poured. Mrs. Olinski lifted her cup in a silent 
toast and slowly sipped. Even before replacing her cup in its 
saucer, she once again felt something lift from her shoul- 
ders. She nibbled on the small sandwiches with no crust and 
soft fillings and ate the tiny tarts with bites as delicate as the 
tarts themselves. Mrs. Olinski felt— the sensation was so 
strange to her that she hardly remembered the word— 
relaxed. She could not remember a time since her acci- 
dent— maybe even before it— when she had not forced 
herself not to notice people noticing her. Yet, the chil- 
dren watched her eat cake and drink tea, and she did not 
feel at all self-conscious. Mrs. Olinski finished the last of 
the miniature cream puffs, delicately touched her napkin to 
the comers of her mouth, folded it, laid it on the table 
alongside her saucer, lifted her eyes, and saw four smiles 
adorn the faces opposite her. She returned their smiles with 
a grin. 

Other paying guests had arrived, and The Souls excused 
themselves as they made trips in and out of the kitchen 
bringing tea and tiered trays of tea sandwiches and cakes. 
They rejoined Mrs. Olinski at her table, and waited until 
the creased V between her eyes smoothed out and disap- 
peared altogether. Then when the last of the paying guests 
had paid his check, Noah said, "We begin practice after we 
clear up." 

There was a tip under the rim of the saucer on each 
of the tables of the paying guests. Whoever picked up 


140 


141 



the money put it into a box on the sideboard to which 
a small sign, written in calligraphy said, TO INSURE PROMPT- 
NESS. 

After The Souls had disappeared into the kitchen, Mr. 
Singh came out. He laid several packs of note cards on the 
table and sat across the table from Mrs. Olinski. He sat with 
his back as straight as his chair, and said, "They were getting 
worried, Mrs. Olinski." 

"Who was?" 

"The Souls, Mrs. Olinski." 

'The Souls?" she repeated. "Who are The Souls?" 

"It would be more proper to ask, what are The Souls." 

"All right, then. What are The Souls?" 

"The Souls, Mrs. Olinski, are what Noah, Nadia, Tthan, 
and Julian have become. Do you understand?" 

"No, Mr. Singh, I'm afraid I don't. Is this some strange 
Indian philosophy, Mr. Singh? Reincarnation. That sort of 
thing?" 

He smiled. His smile was as white as his turban and al- 
most as broad. "An incarnation, perhaps. Not a reincarna- 
tion. Nadia chose the name." 

"Why were they getting worried?" 

'They worried, Mrs. Olinski, because you were on the 
verge of choosing another. Such a choice would have been 
disastrous." 

Mrs. Olinski had never told anyone— anyone— that she 
had been on the verge of choosing another. She grew un- 
easy. Why was Mr. Singh destroying the wonderful relaxed 
feeling she had had only minutes ago? She nervously 
cleared her throat. "But I did not," she said defensively. 

"Yes. It was most fortunate. They have been waiting, 
Mrs. Olinski." 


She said, "I'm afraid I still don't understand. Waiting for 
what? What are you trying to tell me, Mr. Singh?" 

He smiled. The white of his teeth made a dazzling un- 
derline to his turban. "Just think about this, will you? You 
have never been able to explain how you chose the mem- 
bers of your team. You have given answers but no explana- 
tions." 

How did he know that? 

'Think of the atom, Mrs. Olinski. There are energies 
within that tiny realm that are invisible but produce visible 
results." Mr. Singh shook his head slowly. "Do not feel un- 
easy, Mrs. Olinski. Hamilton Knapp would truly have been 
a terrible choice." 

Mrs. Olinski had never told anyone— anyone— that she 
had been on the verge of choosing Hamilton Knapp. How 
could Mr. Singh tell her not to be uneasy when everything 
he said made her uneasyl 

Mr. Singh stood. "Later," he said. "Later you will under- 
stand. But for now, we would like to express our gratitude 
for realizing that Julian was the necessary soul." 

She nodded. "All right," she said. "Later." 

He pushed the packets of cards in front of her. "Would 
you like to be quizmaster today?" 

"I guess I would." 

"I'll send them in. They are ready to begin." 

She absentmindedly turned over the cards. There was 
one question per card, just like hers, but these were written, 
not typed. The writing was calligraphic, the paper white, 
the ink as black as Hecate's soul. She examined the ques- 
tions— they were good ones— and hardly noticed when the 
children had come out of the kitchen and taken places at 
the table on the side opposite her. 


142 


143 



"Who wrote these?" she asked. 

Noah said, "We all did. I gave Julian a calligraphy kit for 
our first Saturday, and I taught them all." 

'Who made up the questions?" 

"You made up some,” Julian said. "And the Test of us con- 
tributed others." 

"You, too, Mr. Singh?" 

Mr. Singh bowed slightly from the waist. "My special- 
ties are languages and weights and measures. Cooks must 
know weights and measures." 

Mrs. Olinski laughed. 'Where did you come up with 
that category?" 

"I'm a big fan of Jeopardy! on the television. When Julian 
and I lived on the cruise ship, they very often had quiz con- 
tests to amuse the patrons. This happened very often when 
the weather was bad." He bowed again. "If you will be quiz- 
master today, Mrs. Olinski, I shall return to my kitchen. I am 
trying out new recipes for bran muffins. Americans care very 
much for bran. 1 learned of this when I was on the cruise 
ship." He smiled. "We must talk again, Mrs. Olinski." 

Noah was saying, 'There are some holes we need to 
plug, Mrs. Olinski." 

"What are they?" she asked. 

Julian answered. "Music and the Bible." 

Noah said, "I keep telling Julian that we can skip the 
Bible." 

Julian said, "When I watch Jeopardy! with Papa, the Bible 
is very often a category. I think we need it." 

Noah said, "Fact: This is New York. Not India, not 
England, and certainly not a cruise ship. This is New York. 
And fact: There is the law. There is no way anyone involved 


144 


with teaching in a public school in the state of New York is 
going to quiz anyone who is in school at taxpayer expense 
on the Bible. They'd be slapped with fourteen lawsuits be- 
fore the buzzer finished sounding. Don't you agree that's a 
fact, Mrs. Olinski?" 

Mrs. Olinski was not thinking about facts. She was 
thinking about their name, The Souls. "I like it," she said out 
loud. 

"You like the Bible?" 

'Well, yes,” she replied. "I like the Bible. As literature, as 
history, I'm comfortable with it as a category." 

Noah sighed. "Does that mean the New Testament and 
the Old Testament?" 

‘Wouldn't hurt," Mrs. Olinski replied. 

"And the Koran?" 

'Wouldn't hurt," Mrs. Olinski replied. 

"The Upanishads?" Julian asked. 

"Those, too?" Noah asked. 

'Wouldn't hurt," they all said in unison. And then they 
all laughed until Noah caught on and laughed, too. 

It was dark when Mrs. Olinski left Sillington House, and 
she was glad. The dark wrapped the afternoon around her 
and kept it close. Sillington House was its own place. She 
lifted one hand from the steering wheel, whipped it off to 
one side, and snapped her fingers. She laughed. The Finger 
Lakes Regional Championship was in the bag. 


145 



9 


T he commissioner of education, recovered 
from the shock of having a contestant protest 
a ruling, cited Julian. He took away the two 
points he had been given for answering half of the 
question and gave Maxwell a chance to answer. The 
two acronyms they gave were MADD: Mothers 
Against Drunk Driving. Julian was about to protest 
that answer on the basis that MADD was not a true 
acronym because it was a word even before it became 
an acronym. But the word itself was spelled with one 
d not two, so Julian, who was patient beyond his years, 
said nothing and waited. Maxwell next came up with 
SONAR. 

While waiting for them to decide what sonar 
stood for, one of the panel of experts looked up from 
a heavy volume and sent a signal to the commissioner. 
He walked over to her. When he returned to the 
lectern, he said, "We have an adjustment to make on 
the score. Tip is an acronym for To Insure Promptness. 


We restore the five points we subtracted as penalty 
and add four for answering the question. Maxwell will 
be allowed to retain two points for MADD, but will 
not receive credit for SONAR.'' 

Julian said, ‘Thank you, sir." 

No one dared applaud, but everyone in the row to 
the left of Mrs. Olinski sported smiles that were very 
loud, and in the row behind her, Nate and Sadie, Izzy 
and Margy sat on their hands. Even Margy got that 
excited. 


Between their regional championship and their trip to 
Albany, word had gotten out that something unusual was 
happening in Epiphany. Mrs. Laurencin had made a call to 
the local newspaper, and Mrs. Olinski and The Souls were 
featured above the fold on the first page of the metro sec- 
tion of the Epiphany limes. 

That started the blitz of publicity to which Dr. Roy 
Clayton Rohmer happily surrendered. He hungered for 
"positive taxpayer feedback," so he called a press confer- 
ence. After Holly Blackwell, the popular anchorwoman of 
Channel Three Eyewitness News, accepted his invitation, 
he invited Mrs. Olinski, The Souls, Mrs. Laurencin, and Mr. 
Homer Fairbain to attend. 

While arranging The Souls behind Dr. Rohmer like a 
backdrop of the American flag, Holly Blackwell pointed the 
microphone at Nadia and, pitching her voice a full octave 
higher than her on-air voice, asked, "And * where * did * we 
* get * all * these * bee-YOU-tee-ful * red * curls?" 

Nadia looked around. 'We?" she asked. "Does someone 


146 


147 



else have red hair?" Whereupon Holly Blackwell turned her 
back on all The Souls and instructed the cameraman to pan 
across their faces occasionally but to focus on Dr. Rohmer. 
Mrs. Olinski was not pleased. Here were four kids who 
could speak in complete sentences without a single you-kttow 
as filler, and Holly Blackwell asked them nothing. She asked 
Mrs. Olinski one question. Guess what it was. How did she 
choose her team? Mrs. Olinski gave one of her good an- 
swers: her "complementary skills" response, dressing it up to 
say that the team's talents blended like a chorus, making one 
sound out of many voices. But her answer ended up on the 
cutting room floor. 

Dr. Homer Fairbain was under orders to smile a lot and 
say nothing except, "The taxpayers are very proud." He 
asked Dr. Rohmer if he could say, "We are veiy proud of 
these youngsters." No. Just "The taxpayers are very proud." 
How about, "Everyone is very proud of this team?" No. Just 
"The taxpayers are very proud." And smile. Smile for Holly, 
the camera, and the sake of ed-you-kay-shun. 

So the session was almost over when Holly Blackwell 
tilted her coif and turned her baby-blues on the deputy su- 
perintendent and asked him how the trip to Albany would 
be financed. Homer Fairbain smiled and replied, "The tax- 
payers are very proud." Dr. Rohmer grew as pale as the 
paper of his unsigned contract. 

Having followed orders, Mr. Fairbain provided the only 
real news that came out of the news conference. Mrs. 
Laurencin immediately called the school bus dispatcher and 
reserved six big yellow ones to take the Epiphany Boosters 
to Albany. 

Dr. Rohmer said that the taxpayers were proud but not 
that proud. He said that unlike football matches where he 


could charge admission to the games, there was no prece- 
dent for charging admission to the Academic Bowl. 
Taxpayer money would pay Mrs. Olinski's expenses and 
The Souls', would even pay Mrs. Laurencins and, of course, 
his own, but he would not, could not, pay for chartered 
buses to take the entire town of Epiphany to Albany. He 
would allow the buses to be used, but he would not pay for 
the gas or the driver. 

And that was when Century Village came through. 

Noah's mother had taped the press conference and sent 
it to Noah's Grandma Sadie and Grandpa Nate who, in turn, 
shared it with everyone in the clubhouse at Century Village. 
They commissioned Bella Dubinsky to design a T-shirt. At 
the suggestion of Mrs. Froelich, she drew a noose. Nothing 
else. Sadie Gershom suggested that she put the name of the 
school under that. 

Bella refused. "Less is more," she said. 

"Not if it's wins over losses," Sadie answered. 

But she liked the design, after all, and they arranged to 
have it silk screened on five hundred red T-shirts, which 
they shipped north. They sold for ten dollars apiece, and 
the profit paid for the gas for the buses. The drivers donated 
their services. 

Mrs. Olinski drove to Albany, taking Julian and Mr. 
Singh with her. 


148 


149 



io 


 

T he judges adjusted the score for the 
acronym question, which put Epiphany ahead. 
Then Maxwell answered: Who was the first 
president to live in the White House? and the score 
was even. Then Epiphany answered: What is the 
waste product of photosynthesis? Maxwell named the 
three major food groups, and Epiphany answered, 
"Who was the first Spanish explorer to reach Florida?" 
The lead ping-ponged back and forth as the teams 
took turns answering. 

 

Mr. Singh said, "You are a very good driver, Mrs. 
Ol inski." The rhythm of his speech was something between 
a chant and a birdcall. "I have not myself a high degree of 
skill for driving automobiles. For many years we lived on a 
cruise ship, and so I was a fully mature man before I passed 
my first driving test. Did you require many lessons to learn 
to drive a handicapped vehicle?" 


"I had a few," Mrs. Olinski replied. They rode in silence, 
listening only to the muffled thump and whirr of the tires 
riding over the interstate before Mrs. Olinski added, "After 
my accident it took more courage to get back into the pas- 
senger's side of an automobile than it took for me to learn to 
drive again." 

"I can understand that," Mr. Singh replied. "It often takes 
more courage to be a passenger than a driver. Of course, 
Mrs. Olinski, I am in no way making reference to this trip." 

Julian sat alone in the back seat and read the trees and 
houses and road signs. He said almost nothing, but Mrs. 
Olinski was never not aware of him. Finally, she said, "Julian 
makes each mile a journey of quarter inches." 

Mr. Singh replied, "It is a skill he learned when we lived 
on the cruise ship, Mrs: Olinski. He learned to be a passen- 
ger. He learned to read the ocean by the cupful. He also 
learned to regard each port of call as part of the journey and 
not as destination. Every voyage begins when you do." 

"When you fill your pen," Mrs. Olinski said. 

Mr. Singh smiled. "Yes, Noah told us." 

 

S uspense grew, and the commissioner did his best 
to sustain it. He took his time between ques- 
tions. He looked over at the judges, nodded, 
reached into the bowl, and slowly, slowly unfolded 
the paper. "This question is Maxwells." Everyone 
knew that. Maxwell would have to answer correctly to 
tie it up again. The commissioner tugged ever so gen- 
tly at his French cuff. He adjusted his glasses. He 
cleared his throat. He read, "In what work of fiction 


150 


151 



would we meet the original Humpty Dumpty, and 
who wrote it?" 

The answer came. "Alices Adventures in Wonderland 
by . . 

"No!" said the commissioner of education before 
they could supply an answer to the second part and 
throw the judges into a panic about the possibility of 
having to award Maxwell half credit and create confu- 
sion about the score. 

There was an audible gasp from the audience. 
Didn't they all believe— those who had actually read 
Alice and not just said they had— that Humpty 
Dumpty came from Wonderland? Behind her Mrs. 
Olinski heard Grandpa Nate Gershom whisper to 
Grandma Sadie, "I think it's Mother Goose. Logic tells 
me that an egg would come from a mother and a 
goose." 

The commissioner of education tapped on his mi- 
crophone and demanded quiet. While the audience 
waited, he took his Mark Cross pen from his inside 
jacket pocket and wrote on the back of the question in 
question: To be discussed: The use of compound ques- 
tions for match point. He replaced his pen in his in- 
side jacket pocket, turned to his right and asked, 
"Epiphany, can you answer?" 

Nadia, Noah, and Ethan looked at Julian, inviting 
him to give the correct answer. "Through the Looking 
Glass by Lewis Carroll." 

It was match point. Epiphany must answer a follow- 
up to be declared the winner. The commissioner 
looked again at the paper in his hand. Several spaces 


beneath and printed in italics was the follow-up: What 
was the true name and occupation of the author ? Julian knew: 
Reverend Charles Lutwidge Dodgson,- math teacher, 
Oxford University. 

It was over. 


Between reality and realization, there was a pause. It was 
over. There was a beat— time for hearts to skip. There was 
a gap— time for hearts and minds to connect. There was a 
moment for joy to find its home. It was over. And Epiphany 
had won. 

The Maxwell side of the room was the first to clap. 
Epiphany, the first to cheer. 

The team from Maxwell walked over to The Souls, 
shook their hands as they had been taught to do, and smiled 
the parched way that losers do. 

The Souls smiled triumphantly. At the audience and 
for the cameras. There must have been a hundred cameras 
flashing and whirring. With spots dancing in their eyes, 
they walked to the edge of the small stage and stood in 
front of Mrs. Olinski and applauded her specifically until 
everyone else got the message and stood and faced her and 
applauded her, too. Mrs. Olinski smiled and said thank 
you and smiled and nodded and said thank you, thank you, 
over and over again, wheeling her chair in small circles until 
her smile and her words floated like a frieze around the 
room. 

The Souls came down from the stage then and, two by 
two, stood on either side of her wheelchair, so the commis- 


153 


152 



sioner had to come down off the stage to give them their 
trophy. They didn't want it unless Mrs. Olinski was there 
with them. 

And The Souls and Mrs. Olinski shared the trophy that 
is called a loving cup. And it was. 

And then it was all over. 


154 


T hey had no sooner made it to the interstate than 
Julian fell asleep. 

Mrs. Olinski and Mr. Singh were quiet, too. Mrs. 
Olinski felt a strange sense of loss. She did not feel like a 
loser, but she did feel a sense of loss. She drove for miles 
worrying about it. Finally, almost involuntarily, she said out 
loud, "Win some. Lose some." She glanced at Mr. Singh and 
laughed. "Why did I say that?" 

Mr. Singh replied, "Because it is how you feel at this mo- 
ment, Mrs. Olinski." 

"I am happy that we won, Mr. Singh. But I don't under- 
stand why I feel a sense of loss. This is not like my accident 
when my loss was overwhelming. Why, after this wonderful 
victory, do I feel that something is missing?" 

"Because something is." Miles hummed past before his 
voice floated back to her. "For many months now, you have 
been in a state of perpetual preparation and excitement. 
Each victory was a preparation for the next. You are missing 
future victories. Have you enjoyed the journey out, Mrs. 
Olinski?" 

"Very much. Every cupful. Like Julian on the ocean." 


155 



"Now, you must put down anchor, look around, enjoy 
this port of call. Your stay will be brief. You must do it, Mrs. 
Olinski." 

Julian did not wake up even when they stopped for gas 
in Oneonta. He had stretched ou* in the back, and the 
bright lights of the service station shone through the rear 
window. His lips were slightly parted. His eyelashes cast 
semicircles of shadow on his cheeks. 

"What do you see, Mrs. Olinski?" Mr. Singh asked. 

"1 see that angels have landed on his eyelids." 

"Yes," he answered, pleased. "Angels have." 

A car pulled in behind Mrs. Olinski. Its lights hit her 
rearview mirror, which she adjusted and then said abruptly, 
"Mr. Singh, do you know how I chose The Souls?" 

Mr. Singh laughed. "I believe you have several good an- 
swers. Which would you like?" 

"I am not asking for my answers, Mr. Singh. I am asking 
for yours." 

Mr. Singh replied, "The Souls have all returned from a 
journey, Mrs. Olinski." 

"A journey, Mr. Singh? All of them?" 

"Yes. Each of them. Noah was first.” 

"Well, yes, he was the first chosen." 

"And the first to return from his journey. From Century 
Village." 

"Nadia?" 

"From the Sargasso Sea." 

"Ethan?" 

"Ethan took a little longer than the other two, yet his 
journey was the shortest. It was a ride on the school bus." 


"And Julian was last." 

"Yes. Julian was last. His journey has been the longest." 

Mr. Singh said nothing more. Mrs. Olinski drove past 
several exits on the interstate, waiting. As they approached 
the ramp that would take them to the state highway that 
would lead to Epiphany, he had still said nothing. She could 
stand it no longer. "Mr. Singh," she demanded, "you must 
finish. You must tell me what you know about their jour- 

fl 

neys. 

"They found something, Mrs. Olinski. Noah at Century 
Village,- Nadia on the Sargasso Sea,- Ethan on the bus." He 
hesitated. "Think about the question that Maxwell missed. 
They did not know that Humpty Dumpty was not in 
Wonderland because they never journeyed through the 
looking glass to find him. How can you know what is miss- 
ing if you've never met it? You must know of somethings ex- 
istence before you can notice its absence. So it was with 
The Souls. They found on their journeys what you found at 
Sillington House." 

"A cup of kindness, Mr. Singh? Is that what I found?" 

"Kindness, yes, Mrs. Olinski. Noah, Nadia, and Ethan 
found kindness in others and learned how to look for it in 
themselves. Can you know excellence if you've never seen 
it? Can you know good if you have seen only bad? Julian 
knows— perhaps even more than the others— about kind- 
ness. We have, my son and I, been most fortunate. We have 
found much kindness when we journeyed on the ship. 
When sixth grade started, my son found malice. Spite and 
malice. Mean things were done to him. Julian has told me 
many stories. Many stories." The music of his voice faded 
and stopped. He looked at, not through, the windshield as 


156 


157 



if it were a small screen showing one of the many stories, 
and then back in focus, he said to Mrs. Olinski, "Each of 
The Souls has had a journey, and so have you, Mrs. Olinski." 

Eva Marie Olinski thought back to the day she had cho- 
sen Julian. That was the day she did not choose Hamilton 
Knapp. She had seen something as she scanned the rows in 
the auditorium. Something that made her not choose him. 
She had seen how mean he was, and that was the day she 
went to tea at Sillington House. 

They were riding down Gramercy Road now, and Mr. 
Singh started to turn toward the back of the van to awaken 
Julian. He stopped and quietly asked, "Do you know, Mrs. 
Olinski, how Julian first invited The Souls to tea?" 

"How?" 

"He sent them invitations hidden in a book." 

"What book might that be, Mr. Singh?" 

"The book was Alices Adventures in Wonderland. He would 
never make the mistake of looking for Humpty Dumpty 
there." 

They said nothing more except good night. 

As tired as she was, Mrs. Olinski took her copy of Alice's 
Adventures in Wonderland down from the shelf. She found the 
Cheshire Cat but no Humpty Dumpty. As Mr. Singh had 
said, if you've not seen something, it's hard to know what is 
missing. She took down Through the Looking Glass and found 
Humpty Dumpty sitting on a wall. 

Humpty Dumpty had a great fall. 

All the King's horses and all the King's men 

Couldn't put Humpty Dumpty in his place again. 


All the king's horses and all the king's men could not 
have done for Mrs. Eva Marie Olinski what the kindness of 
four sixth-grade souls had. 

She closed her book, put it back on the shelf together 
again with Alices Adventures in Wonderland. She went to bed 
with a grin, which like the Cheshire Cat's, remained for 
some time after. For a considerable time after. 


Eva Marie Olinski let herself down out of her van and 
wheeled herself to the bottom of the front porch 
ramp of Sillington House. The Souls were waiting. 
They opened the front door for her. 

And that is when she knew that they knew that she 
knew. 

They made their way to the big familiar table in the 
back of the dining room. 

Mr. Singh had opened the windows along the side wall, 
and a breeze from the fake breathed sweet spring air into 
the room. At last the weather had caught up with the cal- 
endar. Then Mr. Singh took a seat opposite her at the far 
end of the table. She waited until they were all in their usual 
places, and then she asked, "Did I choose you, or did you 
choose me?" 

And The Souls answered, "Yesl" 
